# Change of Numeraire, LIBOR & Swap Market Models

!!! info "Source"
    **Arbitrage Theory in Continuous Time** by Tomas Björk, Oxford University Press, 2nd ed., 2004.
    These notes are used for educational purposes.

## Change of Numeraire

where 
LIBOR AND SWAP MARKET MODELS 
The constant ui is known as the Black volatility for caplet No. i. In order to 
make the dependence on the Black volatility ai explicit we will sometimes write 
the caplet price as ~ a ~ l f i t ;  
a,). 
It is implicit in the Black formula that the forward rates are lognormal (under 
some probability measure), but until recently there was no firm theoretical 
base for the use of the Black-76 formula for caplets. One of the main goals 
of this chapter is precisely that of investigating whether it is possible to build 
an arbitrage free model object which produces formulas of the Black type for 
caplet prices. 
In the market, cap prices are not quoted in monetary terms but instead in 
terms of implied Black volatilities, and these volatilities can furthermore be 
quoted as flat volatilities or as spot volatilities (also known as forward 
volatilities) . They are defined as follows. 
Let us consider a fixed date t, the fixed set of dates To, TI,. . . , TN where 
t <_ To, and a fixed cap rate R. We assume that, for each i = 1,. . . , N, there 
is a traded cap with resettlement dates To, TI, . . . ,Ti, and we denote the corres- 
ponding observed market price by C a p y .  From this data we can easily compute 
the market prices for the corresponding caplets as 
with the convention C a p r ( t )  = 0. Alternatively, given market data for caplets 
we can easily compute the corresponding market data for caps. 
Definition 25.3 Given market price data as above, the implied Black volatilities 
are defined as follows. 
The implied flat volatilities a1,. . . , (TN are defined as the solutions of the 
equations 
i 
C a p y ( t )  = 
capl:(t; ii), 
i = 1, . . . , N .  
(25.8) 
k=l 
The implied forward or spot volatilities al , . . . ,*N are defined as solu- 
tion.~ of the equations 
A sequence of implied volatilities el, . . . , i 7 ~  
(Bat or spot) is called a volatility 
t e r m  structure. Note that we use the same notation a, for flat as well as for 
spot volatilities. In applications this will be made clear by the context. 

THE LIBOR MARKET MODEL 
371 
Summarizing the formal definition above, the flat volatility ai is volatility implied 
by the Black formula if you use the same volatility for each caplet in the cap 
with maturity Ti. The spot volatility oi is just the implied volatility from caplet 
No. i. The difference between flat and forward volatilities is thus similar to the 
difference between yields and forward rates. A typical shape of the volatility 
term structure (flat or spot) for caps with, say, a three months tenor is that it 
has an upward hump for maturities around two-three years, but that the long 
end of the curve is downward sloping. 
25.2 The LIBOR Market Model 
We now turn from market practice to the construction of the so called LIBOR 
market models. To motivate these models let us consider the theoretical arbitrage 
free pricing of caps. The price q(t) of a caplet No. i is of course on the one hand 
given by the standard risk neutral valuation formula 
Capli(t) = aiEQ e- J? TT.'(.) d" . 
[ 
max[Li(Tj-1)-R,~]13t], i = l ,  ..., N, 
but it is much more natural to use the Ti forward measure to obtain 
Capli(t) = aipi(t)~Ti 
[max [Li(Ti-1) - R, 011 Ft] , i = 1 . . . , N, 
(25.10) 
where ~~i denotes expectation under the QT'. In order to have a more compact 
notation we will from now on denote Q T 9 y  Qi. 
The focal point of the LIBOR models is the following simple result. 
Lemma 25.4 For every i = 1,. . . , N, the LIBOR process L, is a martingale 
under the comsponding fornard measure QTj, on the internal [0, Ti-11. 
Proof We have 
pi-1 (t) 
ai. Li(t) = - 
- 1. 
pi (t) 
The process 1 is obviously a martingale under any measure. The process pi- 1 /pi 
is the price of the 
bond normalized by the numeraire pi. Since p, is the 
numeraire for the martingale measure QTi, the process piPl/pi is thus trivially 
a martingale on the interval [O, Ti-l]. Thus aiLi is a martingale and hence Li is 
also a martingale. 
The basic idea is now to define the LIBOR rates such that, for each i, Li(T) 
will be lognormal under "its own" measure Q2, since then d l  caplet prices in 
(25.10) will be given by a Black type formula. In order to do this we consider 
the following objects as given a priori 
A set of resettlement dates To, . . . , TN. 
An arbitrage free market bond with maturities To,. . . , TN. 
A k-dimensional ~ ~ - ~ i e n e r  
process WN. 

372 
LIBOR AND SWAP MARKET MODELS 
4 
For each i = 1,. . . , N a deterministic function of time ui(t). 
An initial nonnegative forward rate term structure L1(0), . . . , LN(O). 
For each i = 1,. . . , N, we define Wi as the k-dimensional Qi-Wiener 
process generated by WN under the Girsanov transformation QN + Qi. 
Definition 25.5 If the LIBOR forward rates have the dynamics 
I 
dLi(t) = Li(t)oi(t) dwi (t), 
i = 1, . . . , N, 
where Wi is Qi- Wiener as described above, then we say that we have a discrete 
tenor LIBOR market model with volatilities 01, . . . , ON. 
From the definition above it is not obvious that, given a specification of 
01 , . . . , ON, there exists a corresponding LIBOR market model. In order to arrive 
at the basic pricing formulas a quickly as possible we will temporarily ignore the 
existence problem, but we will come back to it below and thus provide the 
missing link. 
25.3 Pricing Caps in the LIBOR Model 
Given a LIBOR market model, the pricing of a caplet, and hence also a cap, is 
trivial. Since Li in (25.11) is just a GBM we obtain 
Since ui is assumed to be deterministic this implies that, conditional on Ft, 
Li(T) is lognormal, i.e. we can write 
where Y,(t, T) is normally distributed with expected value 
and variance 
(25.13) 
Using these results and (25.10), a simple calculation gives us the pricing formula 
for caps. Alternatively we see that the expectation Ei for the cap price in (25.10) 
is just the call price, within the Black-Scholes framework, in a world with zero 
short rate on an underlying traded asset with lognormal distribution as above. 
Proposition 25.6 In the LIBOR market model, the caplet prices are given by 

TERMINAL MEASURE DYNAMICS AND EXISTENCE 
373 
where 
with C, defined by (25.13). 
We thus see that each caplet price is given by a Black type formula. 
Remark 25.3.1 Sometimes it is more convenient working with a LIBOR model 
of the form 
dLi(t) = Li(t)~i(t) 
dwi(t), 
i = 1, . . . , N, 
(25.17) 
where ui(t) is a scalar deterministic function, Wi is a scalar @-wiener process. 
Then the formulas above still hold if we replace llu,112 by u:. 
We can also allow 
for correlation betweep the various Wiener processes, but this will not affect the 
pricing of caps and floors. Such a correlation will however affect the pricing of 
more complicated products. 
25.4 Terminal Measure Dynamics and Existence 
We now turn to the question whether there always exists a LIBOR market model 
for any given specification of the deterministic volatilities 01,. . . , UN. In order 
to even get started we first have to specify all LIBOR rates L1,. . . , LN under 
one common measure, and the canonical choice is the terminal measure QN. 
Our problem is then basically that of carrying out a two stage program: 
Specify all LIBOR rates under QN with dynamics of the form 
dLi(t)=L*(t)pi(t,L(t))dt+Li(t)ui(t)dwN(t), 
i = l , . . . , N ,  (25.18) 
where L(t) = [Ll (t), . . . , LN (t)]*, and p, is some deterministic function. 
Show that, for some suitable choice of p1, . . . , p ~ ,  
the QN dynamics in 
(25.18) will imply QZ dynamics of the form (25.11). 
In order to carry out this program we need to see how wN is transformed into 
Wi as we change measure from QN to Qi. We do this inductively by studying 
the effect of the Girsanov transformation from Q' to QZ-l. 
Remark 25.4.1 We have a small but irritating notational problem. LIBOR 
rates are typically denoted by the letter "L" , but this is also a standard notation 
for a likelihood process. In order to avoid confusion we therefore introduce the 
notational convention that, in this chapter only, likelihood processes will be 
denoted by the letter q. In particular we introduce the notation 

374 
LIBOR AND SWAP MARKET MODELS 
In order to get some idea of how we should choose the QN drifts of the LIBOR 
rates in (25.18) we will now perform some informal calculations. We thus (inform- 
ally) assume that the LIBOR dynamics are of the form (25.18) under Q N and 
that they are also of the form (25.11) under their own martingale measure. From 
Proposition 24.4 we know that the Radon-Nikodym derivative 4 is given by 
~ i ( 0 )  . p j o  
4 (t) = - 
~ j ( 0 )  ~ i ( t )  
' 
and in particular 
pi-l(t) 
qj-l (t) = a* . - 
= ai (1 + aiLi(t)) , 
pi 0 )  
where ai = pi(O)/pi-l(0). From this formula we can now easily compute the q;-l 
dynamics under Q" as 
dq;-' (t) = aiai dLi (t). 
(25.22) 
Assuming (still informally) that the Li-dynamics are as in (25.11), and using 
(25.1) we then obtain 
dq;-l (t) = aiai Li (t)ui (t) dwi(t) 
(25.23) 
i-1 
= qi 
(t)aiair 
("-I - 
(t) - 1 u (t) d w i t )  
(25.25) 
qi 
(t) 
pi(t) 
Using (25.21) we finally obtain 
ui (t) dwi (t). 
a 
2 
Thus, the Girsanov kernel for qj-l is given by 
so from the Girsanov Theorem, we have the relation 
dwi(t) = aiLi (t) ~ t ( t )  
dt + dwi-'(t). 
1 + aiLi(t) 
(25.28) 
Applying this inductively we obtain 

I 
TERMINAL MEASURE DYNAMICS AND EXISTENCE 
375 
and plugging this into (25.11) we can finally obtain the QN dynamics of L, 
All this was done under the informal assumption that there actually existed 
a LIBOR model satisfying both (25.11) and (25.18). We can however easily turn 
the argument around and we have the following existence result. 
Proposition 25.7 Consider a given volatility structure 01, a ~ ,  
where each a, 
is assumed to be bounded, a probability measure QN and a standard QN- Wiener 
process WN. Define the processes L1,. . . , LN by 
ak(t)at(t) d t + ~ . ( t ) a i ( t ) d ~ ~ ( t ) ,  
1 + akLk(t) 
) 
(25.30) 
for i = 1,. . . , N where we use the convention c:(. 
. .) = 0. Then the Q"-dynamics 
of L, are given by (25.11). Thus there exists a LIBOR model with the given 
volatility structure. 
Proof Given that (25.30) has a solution for i = 1,. . . , N, and that the Girsanov 
kernel in (25.27) satisfies the Novikov condition, the proof consists of exactly the 
calculations above. As for the existence of a solution of (25.30), this is trivial for 
i = N since then the equation reads 
d L ~ ( t )  
= L i ( t ) ~ ~ ( t )  
dwN(t), 
which is just GBM and since UN is bounded a solution does exist. Assume now 
that (25.30) admits a solution for k = i + 1, . . . , N. We can then write the ith 
component of (25.30) as 
where the point is that pi does only depend on Lk for k = i + 1,. . . , N and 
not on Li. Denoting the vector (Li+l, . . . , LN) by L:~ 
we thus have the explicit 
solution 
t 
1 
Li(t) = ~ i ( 0 )  
exp{Jd 
(Pi LIN+~(~)] 
- ij I I ~ ~ I I ~ ( ~ ) )  
dS} 
x exp{L /Ac [s, LG,(~)] ~wN(.)} 7 
1 thus proving existence by induction. It also follows by induction that, given an 
initial positive LIBOR term structure, all LIBOR rate processes will be positive. 
From this we see that the Girsanov kernel in (25.27) is also bounded and thus it 
satisifies the Novikov condition. 

376 
LIBOR AND SWAP MARKET MODELS 
Remark 25.4.2 Sometimes it is more convenient working with a LIBOR model 
of the form 
dLi(t) = Li(t)ui(t) dWi (t), i = 1, . . . , N, 
(25.31) 
where ui(t) is a scalar deterministic function, Wi is a scalar Qz-Wiener process, 
and where we assume a given correlation structure dWi(t) dWj(t) = pij. This 
can easily be obtained by a small variation of the arguments above, and eqn 
(25.30) is then replaced by 
(25.32) 
where W? 
is the QN-wiener process generated by W, under the Girsanov 
transformation Q' + QN. 
25.5 Calibration and Simulation 
Suppose that we want to price some exotic (i.e. not a cap or a floor) interest 
rate derivative, like a Bermudan swaption, performing this with a LIBOR model 
means that we typically carry out the following two steps: 
Use implied Black volatilities in order to calibrate the model parameters 
to market data. 
a Use Monte Carlo (or some other numerical method) to price the exotic 
instrument. 
In this section we mainly discuss the calibration part, and only comment briefly 
on the numerical aspects. For numerics and simulation see the Notes. 
Let us thus assume that, for the resettlement dates To,. . .., TN, we are given 
an empirical term structure of implied forward volatilities, 81, . . . , 8~ i.e. the 
implied Black volatilities for all caplets. For simplicity we assume that we are 
standing at time t = 0. Comparing the Black formula (25.4) with (25.14) we see 
that in order to calibrate the model we have to choose the deterministic LIBOR 
volatilities ul (.), . . . , UN (.), such that 
Alternatively, if we use a scalar Wiener process for each LIBOR rate we must 
choose the scalar function ui(.) such that 

CALIBRATION AND SIMULATION 
377 
This is obviously a highly underdetermined system, so in applications it is 
common to make some structural assumption about the shape of the volatility 
functions. Below is a short and incomplete list of popular specifications. We use 
the formalism with a scalar Wiener process for each forward rate, and we recall 
that Li lives on the time interval 0 5 t 5 
We also introduce the temporary 
convention that T-1 = 0: 
1. For each i = 1, . . . , N, assume that the corresponding volatility is constant 
in time, i.e. that 
oj (t) = a, 
for 0 5 t 
2. For each i = 1,. . . , N, assume that oi is piecewise constant, i.e. that 
o,(t)=oij, 
forTj-1 < t I T , ,  j = O  ,..., i- 1 .  
3. As in item 2, but with the requirement that the volatility only depends 
on the number of resettlement dates left to maturity, i.e. that 
~ i ~ = & ,  for?-1 < t L T j ,  j = O  ,..., i - I , ,  
where a, . . . , ON are fixed numbers. 
4. As in item 2, with the further specification that 
0.. 
23 = p. 
, Y ~ ,  
. 
forTj-l<t<T', j = O  ,..., 2-1, 
where pi and y, are fked numbers. 
5. Assume some simple functional parameterized form of the volatilities such 
as for example 
oi(t) = qa(Ta-l - t)eP'(T*-'-t) 
where qa(.) is some polynomial and pi is a real number. 
Assuming that the model has been calibrated to market data, Monte Carlo 
simulation is the standard tool for computing prices of exotics. Since the SDEs 
(25.30) and (25.32) are too complicated to allow analytical solutions, we have to 
resort to simulation of discretized versions of the equations. 
The simplest way to discretize (25.30) is to introduce a grid of length h and 
i use the following recursive Euler scheme: 
L, ((n + 1)h) = L, (nh) - La (nh) 
( I * ~ ~ ( ~ ~ )  
o,(nh)o;(nh) 
h 
k=i+l 
( "  1 -k akLk(nh) 
+ ~ , ( n h ) a ~ ( n h ) { ~ ~ ( ( n  
+ 1)h) - wN(nh)) . 
) 
(25.35) 

378 
LIBOR AND SWAP MARKET MODELS 
However, from the point of view of numerical stability it is preferable to use 
a discretization of the SDE for ln(Li). Using It8 we easily obtain 
N 
C 
ukLk(t) 
dt + ui(t) dwN(t). 
d ln 4 ( t )  = - -u:(t) + ui(t)o;(t) 
+ akLk(t) 
k=i+l 
) 
The point of this is that we now have a deterministic diffusion part, which leads 
to improved convergence of the corresponding discrete scheme 
N 
lnL,((n+ 1)h) = lnLi(nh) - h -ai (n ) 
ukLk(nh) u,(nh)u 
( 
+ k=i+l l+ukLk(nh) 
+ ui(nh) {wN((n + 1)h) - wN(nh)) . 
25.6 The Discrete Savings Account 
In the LIBOR models discussed above there exists a forward neutral martingale 
measure Q" = QT* 
for each i = 1, . . . , N, but so far we have not seen any risk 
neutral measure QB for the bank account B, (also known as the savings account) 
and in fact we have not even seen a bank account process in the model. A natural 
question is therefore to investigate whether the LIBOR model will automatically 
imply a money account process B, as well as a corresponding risk neutral measure 
QB. 
In this context it is, however, not quite clear what one would mean by a bank 
account. Since we are working in continuous time, one possibility is to look for 
a continuous bank account of the form we have seen earlier in the book, i.e. one 
with dynamics 
dB(t) = r(t)B(t) dt, 
where r is the continuously compounded short rate. However, since we have 
modeled discrete forward rates it would be unnatural to mix those with a con- 
tinuously compounded short rate, so the natural choice would be to look for a 
bank account which is resettled at the points To,. . . , TN. 
In order to construct the bank account we recall that the essential property 
is that it should be riskless on a local time scale, i.e. riskless between T, and 
TN for each n. The obvious way to achieve this is by forming the discretely 
rebalanced self financing portfolio specified by constantly rolling over the bond 
of the shortest remaining maturity. More formally, suppose that we are standing 
at To and consider the following portfolio strategy: 
1. At To invest one unit of money into the TI bond. 
2. At Tl sell the TI bond and invest everything in the T2 bond. 
3. Repeat this procedure recursively until TN. 

SWAPS 
379 
Denoting the value of this self financing portfolio by B we immediately have 
, and using the relation p(Tn, TN) = [1+ alvL(Tn, TN)]-' 
we obtain the discrete 
B dynamics as 
or, more explicitly 
n-1 
' I1 
B(Tn) = rI ,Tk, Tk,,) 
k=O 
1 alternatively, 
I 
n-1 
B(Tn) = 
P + at+lL(Tk, Tk+l)]. 
(25.42) 
k=O 
We note that B is indeed locally risk free in the sense that B(TN) is known 
already at time Tn, i.e. as a discrete time process B is predictable in the sense of 
Appendix C. 
/ 
We can now easily determine the martingle measure corresponding to the 
1 discrete saving account. 
I Proposition 25.8 The Radon-Nikodym derivative for the change from QN to 
QB is given by 
Proof From Proposition 24.4 we have (on 3TN) 
and since P(TN,TN) = 1 and B(0) = 1 we have the result. 
25.7 Swaps 
i We now move from the LIBOR Market Models to the the Swap Market Models. 
I 
Consider a fixed set of resettlement dates To, TI,. . . , TN, with the usual notation 
a* = Ti - Ti-l. From Section 20.3.3 we recall that in an interest rate swap, a 
I set of floating rate payments (the jloaiing leg) are exchanged for a set of fixed 
payments (the fixed leg). The terminology for swaps always refers to the fixed 

11/111 
380 
LIBOR AND SWAP MARKET MODELS 
lli 
leg, so the holder of a reciever swap with tenor TN - Tn will, at the dates 
Tn+1,. . . , TN, receive the fixed leg and pay the floating leg. For a payer swap 
the payments go in the other direction. For short we will refer to this swap as a 
Tn x (TN - Tn) swap. We now make this precise. 
Definition 25.9 The payments in a Tn x (TN -Tn) payer swap are as follows: 
Payments will be made and received at Tn+1, Tn+2, . . . , TN . 
a For every elementary period [Ti, Ti+l], i = n, . . . , N - 1, the LIBOR rate 
Li+l(Ti) is set at time Ti and the floating leg 
ai+l. Li+l (Ti), 
(25.44) 
is received at Ti+l. 
111 
a For the same period the jixed leg 
ai+l . K 
(25.45) 
is payed at Ti+l. 
It is easy to see (exercise for the reader) that the arbitrage free value, at 
t < Tn, of the floating payment made at Ti is given by 
so the total value of the floating side at time t for t 5 Tn equals 
The total value at time t of the fixed side equals 
N-1 
N 
C P(t, Ti+l)ai+tK = K C aiP,(t), 
i=n 
i=n+l 
so the net value PS:(t; K )  of the Tn x (TN - Tn) payer swap at time t < Tn is 
thus given by 
From Section 20.3.3 we recall the following definition. 
Definition 25.10 The par or forward swap rate ~ z ( t )  
of the Tn x (TN-Tn) 
swap is the value of K for which PS;(t; K )  = 0, i.e. 

SWAPTIONS: DEFINITION AND MARKET PRACTICE 
381 
The first crucial observation to make at this point is that in the formula for the 
N 
par swap rate we can interpret the denominator xi=,+, ajpi(t) as the value, at 
t of a traded asset, namely as a buy-and-hold portfolio consisting, for each i, of 
ai units of the zero coupon bond maturing at Ti. This object is so important 
that we give it a separate name. 
Definition 25.11 For each pair n, k with n < k, the process Sk(t) is defined by 
sk(t) = C nip@, Ti). 
(25.48) 
i=n+l 
S: is referred to as the accrual factor or as the present value of a basis 
point. 
With this terminology we can express the par swap rate as 
In the market there are no quoted prices for different swaps. Instead there 
are market quotes for the par swap rates R z ,  and we see that from these we can 
easily compute the arbitrage free price for a payer swap with swap rate K by 
the formula 
PS: 
(t; K) = (R;(t) - K) S: 
(t). 
(25.50) 
25.8 Swaptions: Definition and Market Practice 
The definition of a swaption (short for "swap option") is as follows. 
Definition 25.12 A Tn x (TN - T,) payer swaption with swaption strike 
K is a contract which at the exercise date T, gives the holder the right but not 
the obligation to enter into a T, x (TN - T,) swap with the fied swap rate K. 
We thus see that the payer swaption is a contingent Tn-claim X: 
defined by 
X: 
= max [PS,N(T,; K); 01 , 
(25.51) 
which, using (25.49), we can write as 
N 
Xn = max [R: (T,) - K; 01 S: 
(T,). 
Expressed in the numeraire Sf, the swaption is thus formally a call option on 
R r  with strike price K. The market practice is to compute swaption prices by 

382 
LIBOR AND SWAP MARKET MODELS 
using a formal extension of the Black-76 formula and to quote prices in terms of 
the implied Black volatilities. 
Definition 25.13 (Black's Formula for Swaptions) The Black-76 formula 
for a T, x (TN - T,) payer swaption with strike K is defined as 
where 
The constant I J , , ~  is known as the Black volatility . Given a market price for 
the swaption, the Black volatility implied by the Black formula is referred to as 
the implied Black volatility. 
As was the case with the Black formula for caps, the Black swaption formula 
has been used by the market for a long time, without any explicit coherent 
underlying model. Our task is thus to build an arbitrage free model with the 
property that the theoretical prices derived within the model have the structure 
of the Black-76 formula above. 
25.9 The Swap Market Models 
From (25.52) it is clear that the natural choice of numeraire for swaptions is the 
accrual factor Sr, and since the accrual factor has an intepretation as the value 
of a traded asset it is a bona fide choice of numeraire from the point of view of 
martingale measures. We now have the following simple but important result. 
Lemma 25.14 Denote the martingale measure for the numeraire S: 
by Q:. 
Then the forward swap rate R: is a Q:-martingale. 
Proof This follows immediately from the fact that R: is the value of a self 
financing portfolio (a long T,, bond and a short Tk bond), divided by the value 
of the self-financing portfolio Sk. 
Thus the forward swap rate, like the LIBOR rates earlier, is a martingale under 
a suitable choice of numeraire, and the accrual factor plays the same role for 
swap market models as the bond prices did for the LIBOR models. The basic 
idea in the swaption market model which we will discuss below is then simply to 
model the forward swap rates Rr lognormally as GBM under the appropriate 
measures. 
Definition 25.15 Given the resettlement dates To, TI, TN, consider a fixed sub- 
set N of all positive integer pairs (n, k )  such that 0 I n < k I N .  Consider 

PRICING SWAPTIONS IN THE SWAP MARKET MODEL 
383 
furthermore, for each (n, k) E N, a deterministic function of time un,k(-). A 
swap market model with the volatilities u,,k is then specified by assuming 
that the par swap rates have dynamics of the form 
where W: is (possibly multidimensional) Wiener under Qk . 
Remark 25.9.1 Because of the interrelations between different par swap rates, 
we cannot model all possible swap rates R: for 0 5 n < k 5 N simultaneously, 
so in a concrete model we have to restrict ourselves to modeling only a subset 
N of all par swap rates. In a model with N + 1 maturity dates we can only hope 
to model N independent swap rates, and typical choices of N are given by the 
following examples: 
A regular swap market model is specified by modeling, for a fixed N, 
the par swap rates hN, 
RY,. . . , R: 
i.e. 
A reverse swap market model is specified by modeling, for a fixed N, 
the swap rates R;, Ri, . . . , hN i.e. 
25.10 Pricing Swaptions in the Swap Market Model 
Given a swap market model, the pricing of a Tn x (TN - T,) swaption is surpris- 
ingly trivial. Formula (24.6) immediately gives us the following pricing formula 
for the payer swaption (regardless of the specific form of the model): 
P S N ~ ( ~ )  
= ~ f ( t )  
E
~
'
~
 
[max [R?(T,) - K; 01 I 3 t ]  , 0 < t 5 T,. 
(25.57) 
Since R:, 
defined in (25.56), is just GBM we obtain 
F'urthermore, since u, is assumed to be deterministic this implies that, condi- 
tional on Ft 
, R:(T,) 
is lognormal, i.e. we can write 
where Y f l ( t ,  T,) is normally distributed with expected value 

384 
LIBOR AND SWAP MARKET MODELS 
and variance 
T, 
2 
En7, = 1 ~ ~ " n , ~ ( ~ ) ~ ~ 2  
ds- 
(25.60) 
As for the LIBOR mode1;a simple calculation easily gives us the swaption pricing 
formula. 
Proposition 25.16 In the swap market model (25.56), the Tn x (TN 
-Tn) payer 
swaption price with strike K is given by 
where 
We thus see that each swaption price is given by a Black type formula. 
Remark 25.10.1 Sometimes it is more convenient working with a swap market 
model of the form 
d~:(t) = R;(~)U~,N 
(t) d~,?(t), 
(25.64) 
where u n , ~ ( t )  
is a scalardeterministic function, W: is a scalar @-Wiener pro- 
cess. Then the formulas above still hold if we replace ((un,~1I2 
by u:,~. We can 
also allow for correlation between the various Wiener processes, but this will not 
affect the swaption prices. Such a correlation will however affect the pricing of 
more complicated products. 
In this section, we have modeled each par swap rate R: 
as GBM under it's 
own martingale measure Q:, 
and this led to the Black formula for swaptions. In 
order to price more exotic products we will typically have to resort to numerical 
methods like Monte Carlo, and then there is a need to specify the dynamics of 
the relevant par swap rates under a single martingale measure. This will be done 
in the next two sections. 
25.11 Drift Conditions for the Regular Swap Market Model 
In a regular swap market model, we model R: 
for a fixed N and 0 5 n 5 N - 1, 
so the obvious choice of a common measure for all swap rates is Qg-,, which 
is nothing else (why?) than the TN-forward measure QTN. Our problem is to 
determine the various drift terms, and since this is somewhat messy it turns out 
to be convenient to have TN+l as the last payment date rather than TN. We will 
thus model G~+',. 
. . , R:+' 
and our problem is to determine the drift terms of 
these par swap rates under the terminal measure Q:+'. 

DRIFT CONDITIONS FOR THE REGULAR SWAP MARKET MODEL 385 
Since the diffusion term of Rf+l will be the same under Q:+' 
as under 
Q;+l, the Q:+' 
dynamics of RE+' are of the form 
where w{+' 
is a Q:+l 
Wiener process, and our problem is to determine the 
drift term 
The determination of the par swap drifts involves solving a backward linear 
difference equation, and for completeness' sake we now recall a general result for 
such equations. 
Proposition 25.17 The linear backward difference equation 
xn = An+lxn+l+ bn+l, n = 0,. . . , N - 1, 
(25.66) 
has the solution 
N 
with the convention nj=N+l a j  = 1. 
Proof Exercise for the reader. 
We may now state and prove the drift condition. 
Proposition 25.18 Under the terminal measure Q;+', 
the Rf+l dynamics 
are of the form 
where the drift term is given by 
where 
(1 + ~ J C R X )  
aj+lRj+l~;+l, 
1 
(25.69) 
j=n 
and where Zn is defined by 
Sn 
Z n =  -. 
(25.70) 
PN+I 
Before going on with the proof we recall that we consider a regular swap 
market model for hN+l, 
R;+', 
. . . , R:+', 
and since the super index N + 1 will 
be the same throughout the argument we henceforth suppress the superindex. 

386 
LIBOR AND SWAP MARKET MODELS 
Instead of R;+l, 
Q;+l, 
and &fl we will thus write h, Qn, and pn and 
similarly for all other terms. 
For easy reference we also recall the following relations: 
~ 
where W, is Qn-Wiener. 
Proof We start by noticing that SN = p ~ + 1 ,  
SO QN is in fact the TN+l forward 
measure with numeraire p ~ + 1 .  
From Proposition 24.4 we know that, with 
we have 
Ln(t) = Tnzn (t), 
where 
Sn 
Zn = - 
9 m=zil(o). 
PN+l 
Since Ln is a QN martingale it must have QN dynamics of the form 
so from (25.73), (25.65), and Girsanov's Theorem it follows that 
It thus remains to determine the process pn and to do this we must determine 
the Zn dynamics from (25.74). From (25.72) we have 
SQ = sn+l+ Un+lPn+l, 
so from (25.74) we have 
From (25.71) we have 
Pn+l = Rn+lSn+l+ PN+I, 

CONCLUDING COMMENT 
and plugging this into (25.77) gives us the recursion 
zn = zn+1(1+ %+I &+I) + 
(25.78) 
From this formula, (25.65), and (25.75) we obtain the QN dynamics 
dZn = Zn+1(1+ an+l&+l) 
&+I ~ W N  
+ Zn+lan+l~&+l~n+l 
~ W N ,  (25.79) 
where we have used the fact that, under QN, Zn has zero drift. We thus have 
zn+l 
dZn = Zn-{(l+ 
an+l&+l) (~:+1+ an+lRn+lCJn+l) ~ W N ,  (25.80) 
zn 
so from (25.75) we obtain the following recursion for 9,. 
/ From Proposition 25.17 we obtain the solution 
I 
where 
I 
A simple calculation gives us 
and we are done. 
25.12 Concluding Comment 
I 
It can be shown that, given a swap market model, the LIBOR rates will not be 
lognormal. Thus LIBOR market models and swap market models are in general 
I 
incompatible. 

LIBOR AND! SWAP MARKET MODELS 
25.13 Exercises 
Exercise 25.1 Prove that the arbitrage free value at t 5 T, of the Ti+l claim 
is given by 
~ ( t ,  
Ti) - ~ ( t ,  
Ti+l). 
Exercise 25.2 Convince yourself that the swap measure QE-, equals the 
forward measure QTN . 
Exercise 25.3 Show that the arbitrage free price for a payer swap with swap 
rate K is given by the formula 
Exercise 25.4 Prove Proposition 25.17. 
25.14 Notes 
The basic papers on the LIBOR and swap market models are Miltersen et al. 
(1997), Brace et al. (1997), and Jamshidian (1997). Since these basic papers vere 
published there has appeared a huge literature on the subject. Very readable 
accounts can be found in Hunt and Kennedy (2000), Pelsser (2000) and the 
almost encyclopedic Brigo and Mercurio (2001). 

%;ml 
< 
i' ' .'R~k)~.jl 
~~I,?TJ~~PW 
26 
FORWARDS AND FUTURES 
Consider a financial market of the type presented in the previous chapter, with 
an underlying factor process X, and with a (possibly stochastic) short rate r. (If 
r is stochastic we include it, for brevity of notation, as one component of X.) We 
assume that the market is arbitrage free, and that pricing is done under some 
fixed risk neutral martingale measure Q (with, as usual, B as numeraire). 
Let us now consider a fixed simple T-claim y, i.e. a claim of the form 
y = q(XT), and assume that we are standing at time t. If we buy Y and pay 
today, i.e. at time t, then we know that the arbitrage free price is given by 
n(t;y) = G(t,Xt;T,y), 
(26.1) 
where the pricing function G is given by 
G(t, 2; T, Y )  = E$ [..eXP 
{-~'rb)dS)] 
, 
(26.2) 
and the payment streams are as follows: 
1. At time t we pay n(t; y )  to the underwriter of the contract. 
1 
2. At time T we receive y from the underwriter. 
There are two extremely common variations of this type of contract, namely 
forwards and futures. Both these contracts have the same claim y as their 
underlying object, but they differ from our standard contract above by the way 
in which payments are made. 
26.1 Forward Contracts 
We will start with the conceptually easiest contract, which is the forward con- 
tract. This is an agreement between two parties to buy or sell a certain underlying 
claim at a fixed time T in the future. The difference between a forward contract 
and our standard claims studied so far is that for a forward contract all payments 
are made at time T. To be more precise we give a definition. 
Definition 26.1 Let y be a contingent T-claim. A forward contract on y ,  
contracted at t, with time of delivery T, and with the forward price 
f (t; T, Y), is defined by the following payment scheme: 
1 . 
The holder of the forward contract receives, at time T, the stochastic 
amount Y from the underwriter. 

390 
FORWARDS AND FUTURES 
The holder of the contract pays, at time T, the amount f (t; T, y )  to the 
underwriter. 
The forward price f (t; T, y )  is determined at time t. 
The forward price f (t; T, 7 )  is determined in such a way that the price of 
the forward contract equals zero, at the time t when the contract is made. 
Forward markets are typically not standardized, so forward contracts are 
usually traded as OTC ("over the counter") instruments. Note that even if the 
value of a specific forward contract equals zero at the time t of writing the 
contract, it will typically have a nonzero market value which varies stochastically 
in the time interval [t, TI. 
Our immediate project is to give a mathematical formalization of the defin- 
ition above, and to derive a theoretical expression for the forward price process 
f (t; T, 7). This turns out to be quite simple, since the forward contract itself is 
a contingent T-claim <, defined by 
We are thus led to the following mathematical definition of the forward price 
process. 
Definition 26.2 Let y be a contingent T-claim as above. By the forward price 
process we mean a process f (t; T, Y) of the form f (t; T, Y) = f (t, Xt; 
T, y), 
where f is some determinstic function, with the property that 
Writing the forward price as f (t, Xt 
; T, Y) formalizes the fact that the forward 
price is determined at t, given the information that is available at that time. 
We now have the following basic formula for the forward price process. 
Proposition 26.3 The forward price process is given by any of the following 
expressions: 
where 
2
A 
as
ti
tl:
tl:
D
w

FUTURES CONTRACTS 
391 
I Proof Using (26.3) and risk neutral valuation we immediately have the 
, following identities, where we write f (t, x) instead of f (t, x; T, Y) 
. ex] 
%" = n(t; Y) - f (t, Xt)p(t, T). 
This immediately gives us (26.4)-(26.6). The relation (26.7) then follows 
from (26.6). 
Note that when dealing with forward contracts there is some risk of conceptual 
time with t 5 
1. The forward price f (s; T, y )  which is paid to the underwriter at time T 
i 
for a forward contract made at time s. 
2. The (spot) price, at time s, of a fixed forward contract, entered at time t, 
i 
and with time T of delivery. This spot price is easily seen to be equal to 
=(s; Y) - ~ ( 8 ,  
T)f 
(t; T, Y). 
26.2 Futures Contracts 
A futures contract is very much like a forward contract in the sense that it is an 
agreement between two parties to buy or sell a certain claim at a prespecified 
the 
:ive 
two 
a ver 
contracts 
,bal defini. 
lies in 
tion of 
the futures contract. 
Definition 26.4 Let y be a contingent T-claim. A futures contract on y, 
with time of delivery T, is a financial asset with the following properties: 
(i) At every point of time t with 0 <_ t <_ T, there k s t s  in the market a quoted 
object F(t; T, y), lcnown as the futures price for Y at t, for delivery at T. 
(ii) At the time T of delivery, the holder of the contract pays F(T; T, y )  and 
receives the claim y .  
(iiz) During an arbitrary time interval (s, t] the holder of the contract receives 
the amount F(t; T, Y) - F(s; T, Y). 
(zv) The spot price, at any time t prior to delivery, of obtaining the futures 
contract, is by definition equal to zero. 

392 
FORWARDS AND FUTURES 
A rough way of thinking about a futures contract is to regard it as a forward con- 
tract where the payments are made continuously in time in the way described 
above, rather than all payments being made at time T. As the forward price 
increased, you would then get richer, and as the forward price decreased you 
would lose money. The reason that this way of looking at the futures contract is 
not entirely correct is the fact that if we start with a standard forward contract, 
with its associated forward price process f ,  and then introduce the above pay- 
ment scheme over time, this will (through supply and demand) affect the original 
forward price process, so generically we will expect the futures price process F 
to be different from the forward price process f. The payment schedule above is 
known as "marking to market"; it is organized in such a way that the holder of 
a futures position, be it short or long, is required to keep a certain amount of 
money with the broker as a safety margin against default. 
Futures contracts, as opposed to forward contracts, are traded in a stand- 
ardized manner at an exchange. The volumes in which futures are traded over 
the world are astronomical, and one of the reasons for this is that on many 
markets it is difficult to trade (or hedge) directly in the underlying object. A 
typical example is the commodity market, where you actually have to deliver 
the traded object (tons of copper, timber, or ripening grapes), and thus are not 
allowed to go short. In these markets, the futures contract is a convenient fin- 
ancial instrument which does not force you to physically deliver the underlying 
object, while still making it possible for you to hedge (or speculate) against the 
underlying object. 
We now note some properties of the futures contract: 
a From (ii) and (iv) above it is clear that we must have 
Thus there is really no economic reason to actually deliver either the under- 
lying claim or the payment at time T. This is also an empirical fact; the 
vast majority of all futures contracts are closed before the time of delivery. 
If you enter a futures contract at time t with a corresponding futures price 
F(t; T, Y), this does not mean that you are obliged to deliver y at time 
T at the price F(t; T,y). The only contractual obligation is the payment 
stream defined above. 
a The name futures price is therefore somewhat unfortunate from a linguistic 
point of view. If today's futures price is given by F(t; T, y) (with t < T) 
this does not mean that anyone will ever pay the amount F(t; T, Y) in order 
to obtain some asset. It would perhaps be more clear to refer to F(t; T, y )  
as the futures quotation. 
Since, by definition, the spot price of a futures contract equals zero, there 
is no cost or gain of entering or closing a futures contract. 
If the reader thinks that a futures contract conceptually is a somewhat 
complicated object, then the author is inclined to agree. 
asr 
Dc 
an 
foi 

1 
FUTURES CONTRACTS 
393 
1 
, We now turn to the mathematical formalization of the futures contract, and 
it should by now be clear that the natural model for a futures contract is an 
asset with dividends. 
Definition 26.5 The futures contract on an underlying T-claim y is a fin- 
ancial asset with a price process II (t) and a dividend process D(t) satisfying the 
following conditions: 
D(t) = F(t; T, y). 
(26.9) 
It now remains to investigate what the futures price process looks like. This turns 
out to be quite simple, and we can now prove the main result of the section. 
Proposition 26.6 Let y be a given contingent T-claim, and assume that market 
prices are obtained from the jixed risk neutral martingale measure Q. Then the 
following hold: 
a The futures price process is given by 
F(t; T, y) = E : ~ ~  
[Y]. 
(26.12) 
a If the short rate is deterministic, then the forward and the futures price 
processes coincide, and we have 
f (t; T, Y )  = F(t; T, y) = E : ~ ~  
[y]. 
(26.13) 
L 
Proof From Proposition 16.14, it follows that the discounted gains process 
has the representation 
~ G , Z  = ht dWt 
for some adapted process h. In our case we furthermore have II (t) = 0 for all t, 
so we obtain the representation 
1 Multiplying by Bt on both sides we get 
dF(t; T, y) = Btht dWt, 
1 which implies that F(t; T, y) is a Q-martingale. Using the martingale property, 
the fact that we are in a Markovian framework (see Lemma 5.9), and (26.10), 
: we obtain 
F(t; T, Y )  = q x t  [F(T; T, Y)] = E:& [Yl, 

394 
FORWARDS AND FUTURES 
which proves the first part of the assertion. The second part follows from the 
fact that QT = Q when the short rate is deterministic (see Lemma 24.9). 
26.3 Exercises 
Exercise 26.1 Suppose that S is the price process of a nondividend paying 
asset. Show that the forward price f (t, x; T, y) for the T-claim y = ST is given by 
Exercise 26.2 Suppose that S is the price process of a dividend paying asset 
with dividend process D . 
(a) Show that the forward price f (t, x; T, ST) is given by the cost of carry 
formula 
Hint: Use the cost of carry formula for dividend paying assets. 
(b) Now assume that the short rate r is deterministic but possibly time- 
varying. Show that in this case the formula above can be written as 
f (t, X; T, ST) = - 
- 
Exercise 26.3 Suppose that S is the price process of an asset in a standard 
Black-Scholes model, with as the constant rate of interest, and fix a contingent 
T-claim @(S(T)). We know that this claim can be replicated by a portfolio based 
on the money account B, and on the underlying asset S. Show that it is also 
possible to find a replicating portfolio, based on the money account and on 
futures contracts for S(T). 
26.4 Notes 
For a wealth of information on forwards and futures, see Hull (1997) and 
Duffie (1989). 

Appendix A 
MEASURE AND INTEGRATION* 
The purpose of this appendix is to give an introduction to measure theory and 
to the associated integration theory on general measure spaces. 
A.l Sets and Mappings 
Let X be an arbitrary set. We then say that X is finite if it contains only 
finitely many elements. If X is not finite, we say that it is infinite. We will use 
the notation f : X + Y to denote a function (or "mapping") f which takes 
values in Y and which has domain X. If we apply the f to an element x E X, 
we denote the function value by f (x). 
Definition A.l Let X and Y be sets and let 
f : X + Y  
be a given mapping. 
1. The mapping f is injective ii for all x and z in X it holds that 
x # z  * f(x) #f(z). 
2. The mapping f is surjective i;f, for ally E Y, there exists an x E X such 
Y = fb). 
upping f is bijective if it is both injective and surjective 
4. The image of X under f ,  is denoted by Im(f), and defined by 
Im(f 1 = {f ( 4 ;  E X I .  
5. For any set B E Y ,  the inverse image or pullback of B under f ,  is 
denoted by f-l(B), and defined by 
f-'(B)={x; 
f(x)E B). 
We also say that B is lifted to f 
(B). 
6. In particular, for every y E Y we write 
f -l(y) = (2; f (XI = Y) . 

396 
MEASURE AND INTEGRATION 
7. For any set A c X the direct image of B under f is denoted by f (A), 
and defined by 
f (A) = { f  (2); 
2 E A) - 
Note that the inverse image of a set always exists (although it could be the 
empty set) even if the function f does not have an inverse. For our purposes 
the inverse image concept is much more important than the direct image. The 
following very useful result shows that the set algebraic operations are preserved 
under the inverse image. 
Proposition A.2 The following relations always hold: 
1. For any A, B c Y we have 
f-l (An B) = f - l ( ~ ) n  f - ' ( ~ ) .  
2. For any A, B C_ Y we have 
3. For any B C_ Y we have 
f -' 
(B
C) = [ f 
(B)] 
where 
denotes the complement. 
4. For any indexed collection {By),fr of sets in Y we have 
5. For any indexed collection {By),Er of sets in Y we have 
Proof We leave the proof to the reader. 
We define the set of natural numbers as the set N = {1,2,. . .), and the set of 
integers 2 as Z = (0, f 1, f 
2,. . .). Using N we can give a name to the "smallest" 
type of infinite set. 
Definition A.3 An infinite set X is countable if there exists a bijection 
If X is infinite but not countable, it is said to be uncountable. 

MEASURES AND SIGMA ALGEBRAS 
397 
Note that in our definition a countable set is always infinite. The intuitive inter- 
pretation of this is that a countable set has "as many" elements as N, whereas 
an uncountable set has "more" elements than N. If X is countable we may, for 
each n E N define x, E X by xn = f (n). Since f is a bijection we can thus 
write X as 
x = { ~ 1 , ~ 2 , ~ 3 ,  
. . a ) ,  
t so we see that in this sense we can really count off the elements in X, one-by-one. 
i 
A countable set is thus an infinite set, but in a sense it is "almost finite", and 
thus very easy and nice to handle. In mathematics in general and in particular 
in probability theory, the difference between countable and uncountable sets is 
crucial, and therefore it is important to be able to tell if a set is countable or 
not. The following result is a good start in that direction. 
Proposition A.4 The set Q of rational numbers is countable. 
Proof It is enough to show that the set Q+ of positive rational numbers is 
countable, and we do this by first representing each rational number plq by the 
integer lattice point (p, q) E R2. We now prove that this set of integer lattice 
points is countable by simply presenting a scheme for counting them. 
The scheme begins with (1, l), (2, I), (1,2), (1,3), (2,2), (3, I), (4, I), (3,2), 
and if the reader draws a two-dimensional graph of this scheme, she will easily 
see how to continue. 
This simple idea can be extended considerably. 
Proposition A.5 Assume that we give a countable family {xn)El 
of sets, 
where each set Xn is countable. Then the union UE1 Xn is countable. 
Proof Because of the countability assumption, the set Xi can be written as 
{xil, xi2, xis, . . .), SO the set Xi can be bijectively mapped into the integer lattice 
points of the form (i, I), (i, 2), (i, 3), . . . . Thus the union UE1 Xn can be mapped 
bijectively onto the entire set of positive integer lattice points in R2 and we have 
already proved that this set is countable. 
The most important example of an uncountable set is the set of real numbers. 
Proposition A.6 The set R of real numbers is uncountable. 
Proof Omitted. 
A.2 Measures and Sigma Algebras 
Let X be a set and let us denote the class of all subsets of X by 2X. More 
formally we thus see that 2X , commonly known as the power set of X, is a 
set, the elements of which are subsets of X. 
We now want to formalize the idea of a mass distribution on X ,  and the 
reader may think of a large plate (the set X )  with mashed potatoes on it. For 

398 
MEASURE AND INTEGRATION 
every subset A 
X we would now like to define the nonnegative real number 
p( A) as "the amount of mashed potatoes which lies on the set A" or "the measure 
of A". However, when one tries to formalize this intuitively simple notion, one 
encounters technical problems, and the main problem is the fact that in the 
generic situation, there exist subsets A G X which axe so "nasty" that it is 
mathematically impossible to define p(A). Typically we are therefore forced to 
define the measure p(A) only for certain "nice" subsets A 2 X. These "nice
7' 
sets are called "measurable sets", and the technical concept needed is that of a 
sigma-algebra (or o-algebra). In order to define this concept, let 3 be a family 
of subsets of X, i.e.3 G 2X. 
Definition A.7 A family 3 of subsets of X is a o-algebra i f  the follow- 
ing hold: 
1. 
0 E 3 .  
2. 
A E T  * A C € 3 .  
Thus a a-algebra contains the empty set, and is closed under complement, count- 
able unions, and countable intersections. In fact, it is only necessary to require 
that F is closed under complements and countable unions (see the exercises). 
Note that the conditions (3) and (4) only concern countable unions. 
Trivial examples of a-algebras are 
Definition A.8 A pair (X,3) where X is a set and F is a a-algebra on X 
is called a measurable space. The subsets of X which are in 3 are called 
3-measurable sets. 
We are now in a position to define the concept of a (nonnegative) measure. 
Definition A.9 A finite measure p on a measurable space (X, p) is a mapping 
such that 

INTEGRATION 
2. 
p(0) = 0. 
3. I f A A , € 3 V n = 1 , 2  ,... andAinAj=O f o r i # j ,  then 
I 
I The intuitive interpretation of (2) is obvious; there is no mass on the empty set. 
j If A and B are disjoint set, it is also obvious that the mass on A U B equals 
I the sums of the masses on A and B. The condition (3) above is an extension 
of this property to the case of an infinite collection of sets, and is known as the 
sigma-additivity of the measure. 
Generally speaking, it is a hard problem to construct nontrivial measures, 
and we will come back to this below. In our applications, we will typically be 
given a measure which is defined a priori. 
Definition A.10 A measure space is a triple (X, 3, p), where p is a measure 
on the measurable space (X, 3 )  . 
A.3 Integration 
1 Let (X, 3, p) be a measure space, and let f : X t R be a given function. 
I The object of the present section is to give a reasonable definition of the formal 
expression 
(A.1) 
and we do this in a couple of simple steps. 
Definition A.ll For an arbitrary A 
X the indicator function IA is 
If f = c IA where c is a real number and A is measurable, then there is a very 
natural definition of (A.l), namely 
Jx f (x) dp(x) = Jx c IA(x) dp(x) = c .  d A ) ,  
( A 4  
the "area under the graph of f" = "the base" . "the height" = p(A) c. 
Observe that we must demand that A is F-measurable, since otherwise the right- 
hand side of (A.2) is not defined. This also gives us a natural definition of linear 
combinations of indicator functions. 


## LIBOR and Swap Market Models

400 
MEASURE AND INTEGRATION 
Definition A.12 A mapping f : X -+ R is simple if it can be written as 
I 
where Al, . . . , An are measurable and cl, . . . , c, are real numbers. 
I 
Definition A.13 For a simple function, as in (A.31, the integral is defined by 
I 
We now want to extend this integral concept to functions which are not simple. 
Let us therefore consider an arbitrary nonnegative function. The intuitive idea 
is now to carry out the following program: 
Approximate f from below by simple functions, i.e. find simple f,, 
n = 
1,2,. . ., such that fn(x) r f ( x )  for all x. 
Define the integral of f as the limit of the integrals of the approximating 
simple functions, i.e. 
The problem with this natural idea is the fact that not all functions can be 
well approximated by simple functions, so we cannot define the integral for an 
arbitrary function. 
Instead we have to be contented with defining the integral concept (A.l) for 
those functions f which can be approximated by simple functions. This is the 
class of measurable functions, and the formal definition is as follows. 
Definition A.14 A function f : X -+ R is 3-measurable if, for every interval 
1 
I g R it holds that f - l ( I )  E 3 ,  i.e. i f  it holds that 
{ x  E X ;  f ( x )  E I )  E 7, 
for all intervals I. We will often write this as f E 3. 
When testing if a given function is measurable, the following result is often of 
great use. 
Proposition A.15 The following properties are equivalent: 
1 
f is 3-measurable. 
{ x  E X ;  f ( x )  < a) E 3, Va E R. 

INTEGRATION 
{x E X; f (x) I 
a )  E 7, Va E R. 
{ x  E X ;  f (x) > a )  E 3, Va E R. 
{x E X; f (x) 2 a )  E 7, Va E R. 
Proof Use Proposition A.2. 
0 
The following important result shows that measurability is preserved under the 
most common operations. 
Proposition A.16 Assume that f and g are measurable on a measurable space 
( X ,  3). Then the following hold: 
1. For all real numbers a and p the functions 
a f + P g ,  
f . 9  
are measurable. 
2. If g(x) # 0 for all x, then 
f - 
9 
is measurable. 
3. If {fn)r=, is a (countable) sequence of measurable functions, then the 
functions 
sup fn, 
inf f,, 
lim sup fn, 
lim inf fn, 
n 
n 
n 
n 
are measurable. 
Proof The proof is omitted. 
We can now go on to define the integral of a nonnegative function on a measure 
space. 
Definition A.17 Let f : X + R be nonnegative and measurable on the measure 
space (X, 3, p). The integral o f f  w.r.t. p over X is then defined by 
where the supremum is over the class of simple functions cp such that 0 5 cp 5 f .  
We now want to extend this definition to functions which are not necessarily 
nonnegative. Let therefore f be an arbitrary measurable function. It then follows 
from Proposition A.16 that also If 1 is measurable, since we can write 

MEASURE AND INTEGRATION 
where 
f+=max[f,O], f - = m a [ - f , o ]  
Definition A.18 A measurable function f is integrable, 
as f E L1 (X, 
3, PI, if 
For an integrable function f ,  the integral over X is defined by 
which we will write 
lx f (x) dp(x) = Jx f +(XI d ~ ( x )  - Ix 
f - 
dp(x). 
If A is any measurable set, the integral off over A is defined by 
We will often write Jx f (x) dp(x) as Jx f (x)p(dx) or as Jx f dp. When the 
underlying measure space is unambiguous, we will write L' 
as shorthand for 
L1 (X, 3, PI. 
Example A.19 We now give a simple but important example of a measure 
space. Let X be the set of natural numbers and let 3 be the power set. On this 
space we now define the counting measure v by 
v(A) = the number of points in A. 
(-4.5) 
In other words, the counting measure puts unit mass on every single natural 
number. We immediately see that on (N, 2 N ,  v), every real valued function will 
be measurable, and a function f is integrable if and only if 
2 vul < 0'3. 
n=l 
I 
The integral of any f E L1 is easily seen to be given by 
I 
Thus we see that our integration theory also allows us to treat ordinary sums 
as integrals. 
We now have some very natural properties of the integral. The proof is not 
trivial and is omitted. 

INTEGRATION 
Proposition A.20 The following relations hold: 
1. For any f ,  g E L1 ( X ,  T, p) and any real numbers a and /3 it holds that 
2. If f ( x )  5 g(x) for all x ,  then 
3. For any function in L1 it holds that 
One of the most striking properties of the integral concept defined above is 
the surprising ease with which it handles convergence problems. The three basic 
results are as follows. 
! i Theorem A.21 (The Fatou Lemma) Let {fn)r==l be a sequence of measur- 
able functions such that 
fn 2 0 ,  n= l,2, ... 
and 
lim fn(x) = f (x), VX E X ,  
n+w 
for some limit function f. Then 
Theorem A.22 (Monotone Convergence) Let {fn)r=l be a sequence of 
measurable functions such that 
1. The sequence is nonnegative, i.e. 
fn>O, 
n = 1 , 2 ,  ... 
2. The sequence is increasing, i.e. for all x we have 
fi(z) l f i ( x )  l . . . I f n ( x )  l f n + l ( x )  5 " ' .  
Then, defining the function f by 
f ( x )  = lim fn(x), 
n 

404 
MEASURE AND INTEGRATION 
it holds that 
Jx f ( x )  ~ P ( x )  
= Jx fn(x) ~ P ( x ) .  
Theorem A.23 (The Lebesgue Dominated Convergence Theorem) Let 
00 
{ fn)n=l be a sequence of measurable functions such that 
for some limit function f . Suppose that there exists a nonnegative function g E L1 
such that, 
Ifn(~)l 5 g(x), Vn, VX E X. 
Then 
A.4 Sigma- Algebras and Partitions 
The purpose of this section is to give some more intuition for the measurability 
concept for functions. We will do this by considering the simplest case of a 
sigma-algebra, namely when it is generated by a partition. 
Definition A.24 A partition P of the space X is a finite collection of sets 
{Al, A2,. . . , A,) such that 
1. The sets cover X ,  i. e. 
2. The sets are disjoint, i.e. 
I 
The sets Al, . . . , A, are called the components of P ,  and the sigma-algebm 
consisting of all possible unions (including the empty set) of the components in P 
is denoted by o ( P ) .  This sigma-algebra is called the sigma-algebra generated 
by P .  
We now have a result which shows (in this restricted setting) what measurability 
for a function "really means". 
Proposition A.25 Let P be a given partition of X .  A function f : X + R is 
o (P)-measurable if and only i f f  is constant on each component of P .  
Proof First assume that f is measurable, and consider a fixed but arbitrarily 
chosen real number y. Since f is measurable we know that f -l(y) is in o ( P )  
so it is a union of some of the components of P .  If the union is nonempty this 

SETS OF MEASURE ZERO 
405 
means precisely that f = y on that union, so in particular it takes the constant 
value y on all components in the union. The converse is trivial. 
The sigma-algebras that we are going to consider later on in the text, are in 
general not generated by partitions. They are typically much more complic- 
ated, so the proposition above is of little "practical" interest. The point of the 
discussion concerning partitions is instead that when you informally think 
about sigma-algebras, it is very fruitful to have this simple case at the back of 
your head. 
As an example, we see directly from Proposition A.25 why we must restrict 
ourselves to integrating measurable functions only. The problem with a nonmeas- 
urable function is that the function is varying too wildly compared with the fine 
structure of the sigma-algebra. In particular this implies that a nonmeasurable 
function cannot be well approximated by simple functions. 
It is also very instructive to see exactly what goes wrong when we try to 
integrate nonmeasurable functions. Even for a nonmeasurable function f we can 
of course in principle define the integral by (A.4), but this integral will not have 
the nice properties in Proposition A.20. See the exercises for concrete examples. 
A.5 Sets of Measure Zero 
Consider again a measure space (X, 3, p). If N E 3 and p(N) = 0, we say that 
N is a null set. If a certain property holds for all x E X except for on a null 
set, then we say that the property holds almost everywhere (w.r.t. p), and in 
shorthand we write "ya.e.". For example, if we write 
this means that there exists a null set N such that f (x) 2 0 for all x E N
C. It is 
easy to see that if f and g are integrable, and f = g, almost everywhere, then 
for every A E 3 we have 
In fact, there is an important converse of this statement, which shows that you 
can test whether two functions are equal almost everywhere or not, by testing 
their integrals. We omit the proof. 
Proposition A.26 
Assume that f and g are integrable and that 
for every A E 3, then f = g, p-a.e. 

I 
406 
MEASURE AND INTEGRATION 
Assume that f and g are integrable and that 
h f dP 2 h 9 d l " .  
for every A E F, 
then f 2 g, p-a.e. 
A.6 The L P  Spaces 
Let p be a real number with 1  5 p < oo. We define the function class LP (X, 
F, 
p) 
as the class of measurable functions f such that 
I 
i 
and for f E LP we define the LP-norm 11 flip by 
I 
For p  = ca the norm is defined by 
11 f ]loo = ess sup If 1 = inf {M E R; If 1 5 M, 
a.e.). 
The two main inequalities for LP spaces are the Minkowski and the Holder 
inequalities. 
i 
Proposition A.27 The following hold for 1  5 p  5 oo. 
1. The Minkowski inequality: 
2. The Holder inequality: 
I 
where p and q are conjugate, i. e. l / p  + l/q = 1. 
From the Minkowski inequality it follows that if we identify functions which are 
equal almost everywhere, then LP is a normed vector space. If { fn) is a sequence 
of functions in LP and f is a function in LP such that 
f
n
f
 
asn-+oo, 

HILBERT SPACES 
then we say that fn converges to f in LP and we write 
Definition A.28 A sequence { fn), of functions in LP is a Cauchy sequence 
if, for all E < 0 there exists an integer N such that 
for all n, m 2 N .  
It is easy to see (prove this) that if fn converges to some f in LP then { fn), is 
Cauchy. The converse is not necessarily true for generally normed spaces, but it 
is in fact true for the LJ' spaces. 
Proposition A.29 Every LP space, for 1 5 p 5 oo, is complete in the sense 
that every Cauchy sequence converges to some limit point. In other words, if 
{f,) is a Cauchy sequence in LP, then there exists a (unique) element f E LP 
such that fn+ f in LP. 
We will mainly be dealing with L1 and L2, and for L2 there is furthermore an 
inner product, which is the natural generalization of the scalar product on Rn. 
Definition A.30 For any two elements f and g in L2 we define the inner 
product ( f ,  g) by 
It is easy to see the inner product is bilinear (i.e. linear in each variable) and 
that the inner product is related to the L2 norm by 
llf llo = m- 
The vector space structure, the inner product and the completeness of L2, 
ensures that L2 is a Hilbert space. 
A.7 Hilbert Spaces 
Hilbert spaces are infinite dimensional vector spaces which generalize the finite 
dimensional Euclidian spaces Rn. 
Definition A.31 Consider a real vector space H A mapping (,) : H x H + R, 
is called an inner product on H if it has the following properties: 
It is bilinear, i. e. for any a, P E R and f ,  g, h E H 

408 
MEASURE AND INTEGRATION 
and 
(h, af + Pg) = &(h, f) + P(h, g). 
It is symmetric, i.e. 
It is positive definite, i. e. 
(f, f) 2 0, 
for all f E H with equality if and only iff = 0. 
The inner product generalizes the standard scalar product on Rn and in 
particular it induces a norm and the concept of orthogonality. 
Definition A.32 
For any f E H the norm o f f  is denoted by 11 f 11 and defined by 
llf ll = m. 
Two vectors f, g E H are said to be orthogonal if f, g = 0. We write this 
as f I g .  
For any linear subspace M E H we define its orthogonal complement 
MI as 
M ~ = { ~ E H ;  
~ I M ) .  
We interpret JJ f 11 as "the length of f", and the following result shows that the 
norm concept really is a norm in the technical sense of satisfying the triangle 
inequality. 
Proposition A.33 
For all f,g E H the Cauchy-Schwartz inequality holds, i.e. 
Il(f,g)I 2 Ilf II 11911. 
The norm 11 . 11 satisfies the triangle inequality, i.e. for any f, g E H we 
have 
Ilf + 911 5 llf ll + 11g11. 
Proof To prove the Cauchy-Schwartz inequality we note that for all f, g E H 
and s E R we have (f - sg, f - sg) = 11 f - sg1I2 2 0. We thus have 11 f /I2 + 
((g(12 - 2s(f, g) > 0. Minimizing this over all real numbers s and plugging in the 
optimal s in the inequality gives us the Cauchy inequality. To prove the triangle 
inequality, write 11 f + g112 
as (f + g, f + g) and expand using the bilinearity and 
Cauchy-Schwartz. 
set 
I 
ex,

HILBERT SPACES 
409 
A vector space with an inner product is called an inner product space, and on 
such a space we may use the induced norm to define the concept of a Cauchy 
sequence and of completeness (as for the LP spaces above). 
Definition A.34 A Hilbert space is an inner product space which is complete 
under the induced norm 11 . 11. 
We note that L2 (X, 3, p) above is a Hilbert space and it is in fact the most 
important example of a Hilbert space. The single most important result for 
Hilbert spaces is probably the projection theorem. The proof is omitted. 
Theorem A.35 Assume that M  is a closed linear subspace of a Hilbert 
space H. 
Assume that f is a jked vector in H. Consider the optimization problem 
min Ilf - 911. 
sEM 
Then there ezists a unique solution ij and it is characterized by the condition 
that 
f - i j l M .  
We have the decomposition of H as 
The direct sum sign @ means that H = M + M' 
and that M n M' 
= (0). 
The optimal ij above is called the orthogonal projection of f onto M. We 
see that the optimal "error vector" f - ij is perpendicular to the subspace M, 
exactly like the situation in Rn. 
Definition A.36 A linear mapping F : H --+ R is called a linear functional. 
For any f E H we sometimes write F f rather than F( f )  . A linear functional is 
said to be bounded if there exists a constant K such that 
It is relatively easy to see that a linear functional is bounded if and only if it is 
continuous. It is also easy to see that if we choose a fixed f E H and define the 
mapping F : H + R by 
Fg=(f,g), Vf EH, 
(A.6) 
then F is a bounded linear functional. The next result, shows that all bounded 
linear functionals on a Hilbert space are of this form. 

410 
MEASURE AND INTEGRATION 
Theorem A.37 (Riesz Representation Theorem) 
Assume that 
F : H + R  
is a bounded linear functional. Then there exists a unique g E H such that 
Proof Define M by M = ker[F] = {f E H; Ff = 0). The M is a closed 
subspace and we can decompose H as H = M + M'. From the definition of M 
it is clear that F restricted to M' 
is linear with trivial kernel. It is thus a vector 
space isomorphism between M I  and R, so M' 
has to be one-dimensional and 
we can write M' 
= Rgo for some go E M'. Now define g by 
Then (go, g) = Fgo so by linearity we have F f = (f, g) for all f E M' 
and hence 
(exactly why?) also for all f E H. 
O l  
Note that we have to assume that the linear functional F is bounded, i.e. con- 
tinuous. On a finite dimensional Euclidian space Rn, all linear functionals are 
continuous, but on a Hilbert space there may exist linear functionals which 
are not continuous. It is only for the continuous ones that we have the Riesz 
representation above. 
A.8 Sigma-Algebras and Generators 
As usual we consider some basic space X. Let S be some a priori given class of 
subsets of X, i.e. S 5 2X, where S is not assumed to be a sigma-algebra. The 
question is whether there is some natural way of extending S to a sigma-algebra. 
We can of course always extend S to the power algebra 2X, but in most applica- 
tions this is going too far, and instead we would like to extend S in some minimal 
way to a sigma-algebra. This minimal extension can in fact always be achieved, 
and intuitively one is easily led to something like the following argument: 
Assume, e.g. that S is not closed under complement formation. Then 
we extend S to S1 by adjoining to S all sets which can be written as 
complements of sets in S. Thus S1 is closed under complements. 
If S is a sigma-algebra then we are finished. If it is not, then assume for 
example that it is not closed under countable unions. We then extend Sl to 
Sz by adjoining to Sl all countable unions of sets in S1. Thus S2 is closed 
under countable unions. 
It can now very well happen that S2 is not closed under complement form- 
ation (or under countable intersections). In that case we extend Sz to S3 
by adjoining to S2 all complements of sets in Sz. 
And thus we go on.... 
C01
PI
so:
wl 
I 
fol 
an 

SIGMA-ALGEBRAS AND GENERATORS 
411 
In this way, it perhaps seems likely that "at last" we will obtain the (unique?) 
minimal extension of S to a sigma-algebra. Unfortunately the method is not 
constructive (unless of course X is finite) so we need a more indirect method. 
Proposition A.38 Let {Fa; a E A} be an indexed family of sigma-algebras on 
some basic set X ,  where A is some index set, i.e. for each a E A Fa is a 
sigma-aZgebra. Define 3 by 
F =  n%. 
a€ A 
Then 3 is a sigma-algebra. 
Proof The proof is left to the reader as an exercise. 
We can now go back to our family S above. 
Proposition A.39 Let S be an arbitrary family of subsets of X. Then there 
exists a unique minimal extension of S to a sigma-algebra. More precisely, there 
exists a 9 C 2X such that 
9 extends S ,  2.e. S C 9. 
is a sigma-algebra on X .  
Q is minimal, i.e. if 7 is any sigma-algebra on X such that S C F, then 
9 c 3. 
Proof Define 9 by 
Q = n ~ ,  
where the intersection is taken over all sigma-algebras 3 such that S C 3. It 
follows from Proposition A.38 that 9 is a sigma-algebra, it obviously extends S 
and from the construction we easily see (why?) that it is minimal. 
Definition A.40 
The sigma-algebra 9 in the previous proposition is called the sigma- 
algebra generated by S, and we write 
The family S is called a generator system for 9. 
If (3,; y E I?} is an indexed family of sigma-algebras on X, we denote by 
the smallest sigma-algebra which contains each 3,. 
If {f,; y E I?) 
is an indexed family of real valued functions on X ,  we 
denote by 
G = f f { f , ;  y e q ,  
the smallest sigma-algebra 9 such that f, is measurable for each y E I'. 

412 
MEASURE AND INTEGRATION 
It is important to understand that even if the elements in a generator system 
S are "simple" (in some sense), the sigma-algebra generated by S can be very 
complicated. 
We first give some rather trivial examples: 
1 
1. If X is the interval [O,1] and S = {[O, 1/21} it is easy to see that a { S )  = ' 
{X, 
0, [O, 1/21? (1/2,11). 
2. If X = N and S is the class of all singleton sets of N, i.e. 
S= { { n ) ;  n E N), then a { S )  = 2N. 
We now come to the single most important sigma-algebra. 
Definition A.41 If the set X is given by X = Rn then we define the Borel 
algebra B(Rn) as the sigma-algebra which is generated by the class of open sets 
on Rn. The elements on the Borel algebra are called Borel sets. 
The Borel algebra is an extremely complicated object and the reader should be 
aware of the following facts. 
There is no "constructive" definition of the Borel algebra. In other words, 
it is not possible to give anything like a concrete description of what "the 
typical Borel set" looks like. 
The Borel algebra is strictly included in the power algebra. Thus there 
exist subsets of Rn which are not Borel sets. 
However, all subsets of Rn which ever turn up "in practice" are Borel sets. 
&formulating this, one can say that it is enormously hard to construct 
a set which is not a Borel set. The pedestrian can therefore, and without 
danger, informally regard a Borel set as "an arbitrary subset" of Rn. 
There are a large number of alternative ways of generating the Borel algebra. 
By recalling that a set is open if and only if its complement is closed it is easily 
seen that the Borel algebra is also generated by the class of all closed sets. Below 
is a list of some of the most common generator systems for the Borel algebra on 
R. The extensions to Rn are obvious. 
Proposition A.42 The Borel algebra B(R) can be defined in any of the 
following ways: 
B(R) = a {open sets) , 
B(R) = o {closed sets) , 
B(R) = a {intervals of the type (a, b]) , 
B(R) = a {intervals of the type (a, b)) , 
B(R) = o {intervals of the type [a, b]) , 

SIGMA-ALGEBRAS AND GENERATORS 
B(R) = u {intervals of the type [a, b)) , 
B(R) = u {intervals of the type (-m, b)) , 
B(R) = u {intervals of the type (-00, b]) , 
B(R) = u {intervals of the type [a, m)) , 
B(R) = u {intervals of the type (a, 00)) , 
B(R) = u {all intervals) . 
At first glance it seems impossible to prove any results at all about the Borel 
algebra, since we do not have a constructive definition of it. The reason that we 
have any control over the class of Borel sets is the fact that it is the minimal 
extension of the class of all intervals, and this can be seen in the following useful 
alternative characterization of the class of measurable functions. 
Proposition A.43 Let (X,3) be a measurable space and let f : X + R be a 
given function. Then f is 3-measurable if and only if f-'(B) 
E .F for every 
Borel set B G R. 
Proof If f -'(B) E 7 for every Borel set B C R, then f is measurable since in 
particular it lifts intervals back to measurable sets. Assume now that f is meas- 
urable. We then have to show that f lifts arbitrary Borel sets to 3-measurable 
sets. To do this, define the class G of subsets of R by 
The class Q is thus the class of "good" subsets of R which do lift back to meas- 
urable sets on X. We now want to prove that every Borel set is a good set, i.e. 
that B 
Q. Now, using Proposition A.2 it is not hard to prove (do this!) that 
CJ is a sigma-algebra. Since f was assumed to be measurable, it lifts intervals 
back to measurable sets, so Q does in fact contain all intervals. Thus Q is a 
sigma-algebra containing all intervals, but since the Borel algebra is the smallest 
sigma-algebra containing all intervals it must hold that B c Q which was what 
we wanted to prove. 
A particularly important example of a measurable space is (R, B(R)), and a real 
valued function f : R -, R which is measurable w.r.t. B(R) is called Borel 
measurable or a Borel function. The following result shows that there are 
plenty of Borel functions. 
Proposition A.44 Every continuous function f : Rn + R is Borel measurable. 
Proof This follows immediately from the fact that a function is continuous if 
and only if it lifts open sets to open sets. 
From Proposition A.16 it follows that every function that we can construct, 
by starting with continuous functions and then using the standard algebraic 

414 
MEASURE AND INTEGRATION 
operations and limiting procedures, will be a Borel function. It does in fact 
require a considerable amount of creativity to construct a function which is not 
a Borel function, so the reader can with very little danger interpret "a Borel 
function" as "an arbitrary function". 
As an important consequence of Proposition A.43 we see that measurability 
is preserved under composition with Borel functions. 
Proposition A.45 Assume that f : X 4 R is a 3-measurable mapping, and 
that g : R + R is a Borel function. Then the composite mapping h = g o f 
defined by h(x) = g(f (x)) is 9-measurable. 
Proof Easy exercise for the reader. 
A.9 Product measures 
Let (X, 3, p) and (Y, 8, v) be two measure spaces. We now want to construct a 
measure on the product space X x Y along the same lines as when we construct 
I 
the area measure on R2 from the length measure on R. 
I 
I 
Definition A.46 A measurable rectangle is a set Z E X x Y of the form 
where A E 3 and B E G. the product sigma-algebra 9 8 6 is defined by 
3 8 B = u {measurable rectangles) . 
There is now a natural definition of the measure of a measurable rectangle, 
namely X (A x B) = "the base times the heightn= p(A) - v(B). Thus we have 
defined a product measure on the class of measurable rectangles, and the follow- 
ing result shows that this measure can in fact be extended to the entire product 
sigma-algebra. 
Proposition A.47 There exists a unique measure X on { X  x Y , 3 8 B )  
such that 
X(A x B) = p(A) v(B), 
for every measurable rectangle A x B. This measure is called the product 
measure and denoted by X = p x v. 
We end this section by formulating a very useful result which shows 
that instead of integrating w.r.t. the product measure we can perform iter- 
ated integrals. 
Theorem A.48 (The Fubini Theorem) Consider the product measure space 
{ X  x Y, 3 18 8, p x V )  and let f : X x Y + R be a measurable mapping. Assume 
either that f is integrable over X x Y or that f is nonnegative. Then we have 

1 
THE LEBESGUE INTEGRAL 
415 
I 
Note that included in the F'ubini Theorem is the statement that the function 
is F-measurable, and correspondingly for the other integral. 
The F'ubini Theorem may of course be extended to any finite product space. 
A.10 
T h e  Lebesgue Integral 
On the class of intervals on R we have a natural length measure m defined by 
m ([a, b]) = b - a. 
! 
The obvious question is whether this length measure can be extended to a proper 
measure on the Borel algebra. That this is indeed the case is shown by the 
I 
following highly nontrivial result. 
I 
Proposition A.49 On the measurable space (R, B) there exists a unique meas- 
ure m with the property that for any interval [a, b] 
I 
m ([a, b]) = b - a. 
This measure is called the (scalar) Lebesgue measure, and by taking products 
we can easily form the n-dimensional Lebesgue measure on Rn. 
Equipped with the Lebesgue measure we can now start integrating real valued 
functions defined on the real line. We know that all continuous functions are Borel 
measurable, and at this point we could encounter a problem, since for continuous 
functions we also have the Riemann integral. If a function f is continuous and 
if A is a finite interval we can form two integrals, namely 
and 
f (5) dz, 
(Riemmn), 
and if we are unlucky these integral concepts could differ. Happily enough, it 
can be proved that whenever the Riemann integral is well defined, it will coin- 
cide with the Lebesgue integral. The advantage of using the Lebesgue integral 
instead of the Riemann integral is that the Lebesgue theory allows us to integ- 
rate all Borel functions, whereas the Riemann integral only allows us to integrate 
Riemann integrable functions (which is a much smaller class). Furthermore, a 
pointwise convergent sequence of nonnegative Riemann integrable functions may 
converge to a limit function for which the Riemann integral is not even defined, 
whereas the class of Borel functions is closed under pointwise convergence. 

416 
MEASURE AND INTEGRATION 
A.ll The Radon-Nikodym Theorem 
One of the big breakthroughs in arbitrage pricing came from the realization that 
absence of arbitrage is very closely connected to the existence of certain abso- 
lutely continuous measure transformations. The basic mathematical tool is the 
Radon-Nikodym Theorem which we will prove below, and although our prime 
application will be in the context of probability theory, we present the theory 
for arbitrary finite measures. 
Definition A.50 Consider a measurable space (X,F) on which there are 
defined two separate measures p and v 
If, for all A E 3 ,  it holds that 
then v is said to be absolutely continuous with respect to p on 3 and 
we write this as v << p. 
If we have both p << v and v << p, then p and v are said to be equivalent 
and we write p N v. 
If there exists two events, A and B such that 
* A n B = Q )  
* p(B) = 0 and 
v(A) = 0. 
Then p and v are said to be mutually singular, and we write p I 
v. 
We now give some simple examples of these concepts. 
Example A.51 
The simplest example of absolute continuity occurs when X is finite or at 
most countable, say X = N, and 3 = 2X = 2N. Every measure p on N 
is of course determined by its point masses p(n), n E N, and the relation 
v << p simply means that 
Let p be "Poisson(c)-measure", defined by its point masses on the natural 
numbers, as 
cn 
p(n) = e-'- n! ' n E N, 
and let v be Lebesgue measure on the positive real line. Then, viewed as 
measures on (R,B(R)), we have p I 
v since p puts all its mass on N 
whereas v puts all its mass on R n NC. 
Consider a fixed measure space (X, F, p), and let f : X --+ R be a nonneg- 
ative measurable mapping in L1 (X, 7, p). We can then define a new measure v 
on (X, F), by setting 
It 
i 
itic
1 
a 1
mt 
I 
COI
qu
TI
spc 
thc
en

THE RADON-NIKODYM THEOREM 
417 
It now follows fairly easily that v is a measure on ( X ,  F, p) and from the defin- 
ition it also follows directly that v << p on F .  Thus, (A.8) provides us with 
a way of constructing measures which are absolutely continuous w.r.t. the base 
measure p, and a natural question is whether all measures which are absolutely 
continuous w.r.t. p are obtained in this way. The affirmative answer to this 
question is given by the following central result. 
Theorem A.52 (The Radon-Nikodym Theorem) Consider the measure 
space ( X ,  F, p), where we assume that p is finite, i.e. that p ( X )  < oo. Assume 
that there exists a measure v on ( X ,  F) such that v << p on 7. Then there 
exists a nonnegative function f : X + R such that 
v(A)= 
f(x)dp(x), f o r a l l A ~ F .  
J, 
(A.ll) 
The function f is called the Radon-Nikodym derivative of v w.r.t. p. It is 
uniquely determined p-a.e. and we write 
or alternatively, 
dv(x) = f ( X I  dp(x). 
Proof We sketch a proof which is due to von Neumann. Define a new measure 
X by setting X(A) = p(A) + v(A), for all A E 3. For any g E L2 (A) we can define 
the linear mapping @ : X + R by 
and by the triangle and Cauchy-Schwartz inequalities we have 
Thus, from the Riesz Representation Theorem there exists an f E L2 (A) such 
that @(g) = (g, f )  for all g E L2(X), i.e. 

418 
MEASURE AND INTEGRATION 
By choosing g = IA for arbitrary A E 3 and using the fact that 0 5 v(A) 5 A(A) 
we see that 0 5 f 5 1. We now write (A.14) as 
Since this holds for all g E L2 (A) and in particular for all indicator functions, we 
can write this on "differential form" (see the exercises for a justification of this) as 
(1 - f)dv = f dp. 
It is now tempting to multiply through by (1 - f)-' to obtain 
and thus to define the Radon-Nikodym derivative by f /(1 - f ), but the prob- 
lem is of course what happens when f = 1. Define therefore A by A = 
{x E X; f (x) = I), and set g = IA. From (A.15) we obtain 
and (since f 2 0) this implies that p(A) = 0. We now use the assumption that 
v << p to deduce that also v(A) = 0, so we can safely write 
and we see that the Radon-Nikodyrn derivative is in fact given by 
Example A.53 Going back to Example A.51 we consider the case when X = N, 
and 3 = 2 N ,  and we recall that the relation v << p means that 
Thus, given p and v with v << p, the problem of finding a Radon-Nikodym 
derivative f will in this case boil down to the problem of finding an f such that 
We r 
so tl: 
ity i 
becc 
and 
Con 
uniq 
I 
relal 
'1 
"PI 
exar 
and 
Her( 
do 1 
(No 
t inc 
also 
A.1 
Exc 
Ex1 
(an 
f-' 
Ex1 
Pro 
Pro 

EXERCISES 
419 
We see that for those n where p(n) # 0 we can solve (A.16) by defining f (n) as 
so the only problem occurs when p(n) = 0. However, from the absolute continu- 
ity it follows that v(n) = 0 whenever p(n) = 0, so for those n equation (A.16) 
becomes 
O =  f(n).O 
and we see that for those n we can defhe f arbitrarily, say by putting f (n) = 17. 
Consequently f is not uniquely defined, but we see that the set where it is not 
uniquely defined (i.e. for those n where p(n) = 0) has p measure zero. 
It is important to realize that the concept of absolute continuity is defined 
relative to the given sigma-algebra. If, for example, 8 C 3 then it could well 
happen that p << v on G while it does not hold that p << v on 3. A trivial 
example is given by setting X = {1,2,3), and defining 
and 
I 
Here we obviously do not have v << p on 3, since p(2) = 0 while v(2) # 0. We 
do however, have v << p on G with () Radon-Nikodym derivative given by 
(Note in particular that f is 8-measurable.) 
We thus see that if we enlarge the sigma-algebra we may lose absolute con- 
tinuity, but if v << p on some measurable space (X, 7) and 8 & 7, then v << p 
also on 8. 
A.12 Exercises 
Exercise A.l Prove Proposition A.2. 
Exercise A.2 Which of the properties stated in Proposition A.2 are still valid 
(and which are not necessarily valid) if we replace f -l with f in expressions like 
f -l (a U B) etc.? 
Exercise A.3 Show that in the definition of a sigma-algebra, the closedness 
property under countable intersections in fact follows from the other defining 
properties. 

420 
MEASURE AND INTEGRATION 
Exercise A.4 Let p be a measure. Show formally, using the axioms of a 
measure, that the following relations hold for all measurable sets A and B. 
Exercise A.5 Let X be a finite set X = {xl,. . . , xK) and define 3 as the 
power algebra 2X. Let furthermore p be a measure on (X, 3 )  and define p, by 
pn = p({x,)), i.e. pn denotes the mass on the point x,. Let f be any real valued 
nonnegative function, and show in detail, by using Definition A.17 that 
Exercise A.6 Define X by X = [O, 21 and define 3 by 3 = (0, Q, [0, I), [I, 21). 
Define a measure p by setting 
p (0, 1 )  = 1, p ([I, 21) = 1, p ([O, 21) = 2, 
and define the functions f,g : X -+ 
R by f (x) = x and g(x) = 2 - X. 
I 
i 
(a) Show that f and g are not measurable. 
(b) Despite the fact that neither f nor g is measurable we now define 
where the supremum is taken over all nonnegative measurable simple 
functions cp such that cp 5 g. We make the corresponding definition 
for g. Now compute and compare Sx f dp, lX g dp and Sx (f + g) dp. 
Exercise A.7 The object of this exercise is to show that a measurable func- 
tion can be well approximated by simple functions. Let therefore f : X -+ R 
be a nonnegative measurable function on some measurable space (X, F ) ,  and 
also assume that there exists some constant M such that 0 5 f(x) < M for 
all x E X. Show that for every n there exists a simple function f, such that 
f (x) 5 fn(x) < f (x) + 1/n for all x E X. 
Hint: Consider sets of the form {x E X; kln < f (x) 5 (k + 1) In). 
Exercise A.8 Continuing the exercise above, show that there exists an increas- 
ing sequence of simple functions fn such that f,(x) t f (x) for all x E X. 
Exercise A.9 Fill in the details in the proof of Proposition A.33. 
Exercise A.10 Prove proposition A.38. 
Exercise A.ll Describe the sigma-algebra on R which is generated by the class 
of all singleton sets, i.e. of all sets of the form {x), where x E R. 
Exc
Exc
corn
is a 
Exc 
g E 
A.1
ROJ
and 

NOTES 
Exercise A.12 Prove Proposition A.45 by using Proposition A.43. 
Exercise A.13 Let (3,; n = 1,2,. . .) be a sequence of sigma-algebras on some 
common space X. Does it always hold that 
w 
p e f  U3, 
2 = 1  
is a sigma-algebra? What if the sequence is increasing? 
Exercise A.14 Consider two measures p and v with v << p. For any functions 
g E L1 (v) and f E L1 (p) we define the "differential equality" 
gdv= f dp, 
(A.17) 
as being shorthand for 
L 
f (x) dv(x) = 
g(x) dp(x), VA E 3 .  
L 
dv 
f = -  
dv= f d p  
d~ 
(b) Show that for any h E L1(gdv) it holds that 
gdv= f d p  =+ hgdv=hfdp 
(c) Assume that X << v << p and prove the "chain rule" 
dX 
dX dv 
-=-.- 
dp 
dv dp' 
(d) Assuming v N p, prove that 
d~ 
-1 
s=($) 
. 
A.13 Notes 
Royden (1988) gives a very clear and readable presentation of measure theory, 
and also treats point set topology and basic functional analysis. 

Appendix B 
PROBABILITY THEORY* 
A probability space is simply a measure space (R, 3, P) where the measure P 
has the property that it has total mass equal to unity, i.e. 
The underlying space R often is referred to as the sample space, and the 
elements of the sigma-algebra 3 are called events. 
B.l Random Variables and Processes 
In this section we will discuss random variables and random processes. 
Definition B.l A random variable X is a mapping 
such that X is 3-measurable. 
Remark B.l.l As the reader probably has observed, the letter X, which in 
the previous chapter was used to designate a measure space, is now used as the 
name of a random variable. This is an unfortunate clash of notation, but since 
each use of the letter X is standard within its respective area of application 
we will simply accept this. There is however no risk of confusion: from now on 
the measure space will always be a probability space, and thus denoted by R. 
The only use of X will be as a name for a random variable or a random process. 
The interpretation of a random variable is as follows: 
Somewhere, hidden from us, a point w E R in the sample space is 
"randomly" chosen by, say, the God of Chance. 
We are not allowed to observe w directly, but we are allowed to observe 
measurements on the sample space, i.e. we can observe the real number 
X(w), which gives us partial information about w. 
Definition B.2 The distribution measure p x  for a random variable X is a 
measure on (R, B) defined by 
The
1
is in 
and 
and 
~ x ( B ) = P ( { w E R ;  X(W)E B)), B E B ,  

RANDOM VARIABLES AND PROCESSES 
423 
The (cumulative) distribution function of X is denoted by Fx and defined by 
I 
Fx (x) = P ({w E 0 ;  X(w) 1 2)) . 
Note that since X is assumed to be measurable, the event {w E R; X(w) E B) 
is in 3 so its P measure is well defined. We will often write this event as {X E B) 
and then the definition of the distribution measure becomes 
and the distribution function can be written as 
We now go on to introduce the measure theoretic definition of an expected 
value. 
Definition B.3 For any X E L' (R,3, P )  its expected value, denoted by 
1 E[X], is defined by 
t 
1 
For X E L2 the variance is defined by 
We note that the definition above gives the expected value and the variance as 
integrals over the (abstract) sample space R. The following result connects these 
formulas to the standard elementary formulas where expectations and variances 
are computed as integrals over the real line. 
Proposition B.4 Let g : R -+ R be a Bore1 jiinction such that the composite 
random variable g(X) i s  integrable. Then we have 
Proof We leave the proof as an exercise. See the exercises for hints. 
We note that the first equality above holds by definition. The point of the result 
is thus the second equality. The careful reader notes (with satisfaction) that, by 
Proposition A.45, the measurability of g(X) is guaranteed. 
In order to convince the reader that the framework above really is of some 
value, we will now prove a useful result which shows that in some cases an 
expected value can be computed in terms of an ordinary Lebesgue integral. 

424 
PROBABILITY THEORY 
Proposition B.5 Let X be a nonnegative random variable. Then it holds that 
Proof By using the Fubini Theorem we have 
= J, [lW 
~ { t  
5 x(w)} - dt] dP(w) = lm 
[L ~ { t  
5 X(w)} dP(w) dt 
I 
where the event At = {X 2 t}. We thus have 
4x1 = lo P(At) dt = lo P (X > t) dt. 
We now go on to the concept of a random process. 
Definition B.6 A random process on the probability space (R,3, P) is a 
mapping 
X : R + x R + R ,  
such that for each t E R+ the mapping 
We interpret X(t, w) as "the value at time t given the outcome w", and we will 
also use the alternative notation Xt 
(w). 
Note the following: 
For each fixed t the mapping 
which we also denote by Xt, is a random variable. 
For each w E R the mapping 
Con 
can 
follc

PARTITIONS AND INFORMATION 
425 
is a deterministic function of time. This function, which we may draw 
as a graph, is called the realization or trajectory of X for the outcome 
w. When we observe a random process over time (like the evolution of a 
stock price) we thus see the trajectory of a single w. 
In the definition above we have defined processes only on the time interval 
0 5 t < oo, but we can of course consider processes defined on just a subinterval 
or on the integers (a "discrete time process"). 
B.2 Partitions and Information 
Consider a sample space R and a given partition P = {Al,. . . , AK) of R. We 
can now give an intuitive interpretation of P in information terms along the 
following lines: 
Someone (the God of Chance?) chooses a point w in the sample space. We 
do not know exactly which point has been chosen. 
What we do get information about, is exactly which component of P that 
w belongs to. More formally one can think of this as an experiment where 
we are allowed to observe the random variable Y defined by 
Y(w) = 
n . I*,, (w) . 
If we observe Y(w) = n then we know with certainty that w lies in A,. 
We thus see that having access to a certain partition can be interpreted 
as having access to a certain amount of information. We note that the trivial 
partition P = {R) corresponds to "no information at all". The other extreme 
case occurs when R is finite, say R = {wl, . . . , wN), and the partition is given 
by T = {{wl) , {w2) , . . . , { w ~ ) } .  
This case corresponds to "full information". 
In some cases we may even compare the informational content in two separate 
partitions. Consider, as an example, the space R = [O, 11 with two partitions 
where 
A1 = [O, ;) , A2 = [f, 2) , A3 = [;, a) , 
A4 = [;, 
11 
and 
P 2  = {Bl, B2, B3), 
where 
[o,;), B2= [;,;), 
B3= 

426 
PROBABILITY THEORY 
It is now natural to say that PI contains more information than P2 since the 
partition PI has been obtained by subdividing some of the components of P2 into 
smaller pieces. There is thus a natural partial order relation between different 
partitions of a given sample space, and in the example above we say that Pl is 
finer than P2. 
Definition B.7 For a given sample space 52, a partition S is said to be finer 
than a partition P if every component in P is a union of components in S. 
The interpretation of this is of course that "S contains more information than P" . 
Consider again the sample space R and some given but otherwise arbitrary 
mapping f : R + R. For simplicity we assume that f only takes finitely many 
values, and we denote these values by XI, 22, . . . , XK. The interpretation is that f 
is a measurement on R and that we gain knowledge about the (unknown) sample 
point w by observing the measurement f (w). We now note that f generates a 
natural partition P(f) defined by 
where 
An={weR; f ( w ) = ~ n ) ,  n = 1 , 2  ,..., K. 
It is then natural to interpret the partition P(f) as "the information generated 
by f" , since by observing f we can exactly tell in which component of P(f) that 
w lies. 
We also see that given the information in P(f), i.e. given information about 
in which components w lies, we can exactly determine the value f (w). The reason 
for this is of course that f is constant on each component on P(f) and we can 
easily generalize this observation to the following definition and lemma. 
Definition B.8 A given mapping f : R --+ R is called measurable w.r.t a 
partition P if and only if it is constant on the components of P. 
Lemma B.9 Take as given a sample space R, a finite valued mapping f : R + R 
and a partition P. Iff is P-measurable then the value off is completely determ- 
ined by the information in P in the sense that if we know in which component 
of P it is located, then we know the function value f (w). 
Consider again the sample space R and a finite valued mapping f : R + R. 
If we also are given another mapping g : R 4 R and define h : R + R by 
h(w) = g(f (w)), then it is obvious that h generates less information than f ,  i.e. 
that P(f) is finer than P(h), which also can be expressed by saying that h is 
constant on the components in P(f), i.e. h is P(f)-measurable. There is also 
a converse of this result which will have important generalizations later on in 
the text. 
PI
R 
f.
PI
B,
Le
fol 
As
we 
Fr 
c
to 
t hf 
t h2 
infi
fra
lon
an(
the
; ter
2 
bet
-

SIGMA-ALGEBRAS AND INFORMATION 
427 
Proposition B.10 Consider a fied R and two finite valued mappings f : R + 
R and h : R -t R. Assume that h is P(f)-measurable. Then there exists a 
function g : R -, R such that h = g o f .  
Proof Exercise for the reader. 
B.3 Sigma-algebras and Information 
Let us again consider the sample space 0 and a give partition P. We note the 
following facts: 
The partition P generates a natural sigma-algebra, namely u {P). 
F'rom a {P) we can easily reconstruct the original partition P ,  since the 
components of P are precisely the atoms in u {P), i.e. the sets in u {P) 
which have no proper subsets (apart from 0) in u {P). 
If 3 and S are two partitions, then 
S is finer than P 
.. 
j 
if and only if 
P c S. 
For any mapping f : R + R it holds that 
f is P-measurable 
if and only if 
f is 0 {PI-measurable. 
As long as we are working with finite partitions it is thus logically equivalent if 
we work with partitions or if we work with the corresponding sigma-algebras. 
F'rom a technical point of view, however, the sigma-algebra formalism is superior 
to the partition formalism, since a sigma-algebra is closed under the usual set 
theoretic operations. Furthermore; our development of measure theory demands 
that we have a sigma-algebra as the basic object. Thus, even if the intuitive 
information concept is perhaps most natural to formulate within the partition 
framework, it turns out that the sigma-algebra formalism is vastly superior in the 
long run. It should also be emphasized that the equivalence between partitions 
and sigma-algebras only holds when the partition is finite. In the general case, 
there is simply no alternative to the sigma-algebra formalism. 
We will therefore, henceforth, formalize the intuitive information concept in 
terms of sigma-algebras, and in particular we will interpret the relation 
between two sigma-algebras G and 3 as 
"G contains less information than 3." 

428 
PROBABILITY THEORY 
3 
Let us again take a sample space R as given, and consider a mapping R : 
X -+ R. We recall an earlier definition: 
Definition B.ll The sigma-algebra a { X )  is defined as the smallest sigma- 
algebra 3 such that X is 3-measurable. 
We will refer to a { X )  as "the sigma-algebra generated by X". 
Technically speak- 
ing it is the intersection of all sigma-algebras 6 such that X is 8-measurable, 
but we can in fact give a more explicit representation. 
Proposition B.12 W e  have the representation 
u { x )  = {x-'(B); 
B E a(R)) . 
? : I 
Proof Exercise for the reader. 
Definition B.13 Let K be an arbitrary family of mappings from R to R. Then 
a { K )  is defined as the smallest sigma-algebra 6 such that X is B-measurable for 
all X E K .  
We now have a general result for sigma-algebras, which is parallel to 
Proposition B.10 for partitions. The proof is not easy and therefore omitted. 
Proposition B.14 Let X I , .  . . , X N  be given mappings X ,  : R -+ R, and assume 
that a mapping Z : 52 -+ R is o { X I , .  . . , XN)-measurable. Then there exists a 
Borel function f : R~ --+ R such that for all w E R we have 
This proposition thus formalizes the idea that if a random variable X is measur- 
able w.r.t. a certain sigma-algebra then "the value of the variable is completely 
determined by the information contained in the sigm&algebra7'. 
We now pass on to random processes, and note that every random process 
generates an entire family of interesting sigma-algebras. 
Definition B.15 Let { X t ;  t 2 0) be a random process, defined on the probabil- 
ity space (R, 3, P). W e  then define the sigma-algebra generated by X over 
the interval [0, t] by 
3:=.{x,; 
s s t ) .  
1 
The intuitive interpretation is that "3: is the information generated by 
observing X over the time interval [0, t]". There is in general no very expli- 
cit description of 3?, but it is not hard to show that 3? is generated by all ' 
events of the form { X ,  E B} for all s 5 t and all Borel sets B. 
the
A fi
11 tim 
Dej
spa1
ada 
The
xt 
timc 
the 
intt 

SIGMA-ALGEBRAS AND INFORMATION 
429 
I 
j 
If Z is a random variable then, based on the discussions above, we interpret 
1 the statement 
I 
"Z is a function of the entire X-trajectory over the interval [0, t]." 
From the definition it is immediately clear that 
9 r t  * 333:, 
I 
so every random process X will in this way generate an increasing family of 
sigma-algebras. We now generalize this concept. 
Definition B.16 A filtration 3 = {3t)t20 
on the probability space (a, 3, P) 
is an indexed family of sigma-algebras on R such that 
Given a filtration L as above, the sigma-algebra Fm is defined as 
A filtration thus formalizes the idea of an nondecreasing information flow over 
time. We now introduce one of the most basic concepts for stochastic processes. 
Definition B.17 Consider a given filtration L = {3t)t20 on some probability 
space, and a random process X on the same space. W e  say that the process X is 
adapted to the filtration 
if 
The interpretation of this definition is that "For every fixed t, the process value 
Xt is completely determined by the information 3t that we have access to at 
time t". Alternatively we can say that "an adapted process does not look into 
the future". We note in passing that the process X is always adapted to the 
internal filtration 32 generated by X. 

430 
PROBABILITY THEORY 
Example B.18 Let Z be any random process with continuous trajectories, and 
define the filtration 3 as the internal filtration Ft = 3:. 
The following processes 
are adapted: 
I 
The processes 
are not adapted. 
In a typical financial application, the filtration 
is generated by the observed 
asset prices. A natural requirement for a portfolio strategy is that the port- 
folio decision, i.e. taken at time t, is only allowed to depend upon the public 
information that we have access to at time t (by observing asset prices). The 
formalization of this idea is to demand that the portfolio strategy should be 
adapted. 
B.4 Independence 
We consider again a given probability space (R,3, P), and recall the standard 
definition of independent events. 
Definition B.19 Two events A, B E 3 are independent if 
We now generalize this definition to sigma-algebras, random variables and 
processes. 
Definition B.20 
Two sigma-algebras (2, 'H E 3 are independent if 
for all G E B and all H E 'H. 
for 

INDEPENDENCE 
431 
Two random variables X and Y are independent if the sigma-algebras 
a {X) and a {Y) are independent. 
T w o  stochastic processes X and Y are independent if the sigma-algebras 
a {Xt ; t 2 0) and a {K; t 2 0) are independent. 
An indexed family {G?; y E I?) of sigma-algebras, where G7 E 3 for each 
y E I? are mutually independent if 
for every finite sub wllection GI,. . . ,Gn where Gi E GTj and where 
^/i # yj for i # j. The extension to random variables and processes is 
the obvious one. 
We note that two random variables X and Y are independent if and only if 
for all Bore1 sets B1 and B2. 
We now formulate and sketch the proof of a very useful result. 
Proposition B.21 Suppose that the random variables X and Y are independ- 
ent. Assume furthermore that X, Y ,  and X Y  are in L1. Then we have 
Proof We do the proof in several steps. 
1. Choose arbitrary A E a {X) and B E a {Y). Then we have 
Thus the proposition holds for indicator functions. 
2. From the previous item and from the linearity of the integral it follows 
that (B.l) holds for all simple functions (check this in detail). 
3. In the general case we can WLOG (without loss of generality) assume 
that X and Y are nonnegative. In that case there exist (see the exercises) 
sequences {Xn) and {Yn) of simple random variables such that 

432 
PROBABILITY THEORY 
From item 2 above we have 
Now we let n -+ oo and use the Monotone Convergence Theorem. 
I 
We also have the following simple but useful corollary. 
Corollary B.22 If X and Y are independent random variables, and i f f  and 
g are Bore1 functions, then f(X] and g(Y) are independent. I n  particular, if 
f (X), g(Y), and f (X)g(Y) are in L1, then 
Proof Exercise for the reader. 
B.5 Conditional Expectations 
Apart from the concept of independence, the most important concept in probab 
ility theory is that of conditional expectation. We will need to treat this concept 
in its most general (but also most useful) version, namely that of a conditional 
expectation given a sigma-algebra. We start, however with a more elementary 
discussion in order to motivate the more abstract arguments later on. 
Consider a fixed probability space (R, 3, 
P), and suppose that A and B are 
events in 3 with P(B) # 0. We recall the elementary definition of conditional 
probability. 
Definition B.23 The probability of A, conditional o n  B is defined by 
The intuition behind this definition is as follows: 
The probability for any event A is the fraction of the total mass which is 
located on A, so 
When we condition on B, we know that B has happened. Thus the effect- 
ive sample space is now B rather than fl. This explains the normalizing 
factor in the nominator of (B.2). 
The only part of A that can occur if we know that B has occurred is 1 
precisely A n B. 
What we are looking for is now a sensible definition of the object 
wh 
int 
ha7 
vag 
i.e. 
"PI
rar
Th
tak 
mu 
eq1
an(
De 
Th
We 
titi
infc 
knc 
No
Fro 
put
a n
TE-

CONDITIONAL EXPECTATIONS 
433 
where X is a random variable and G is a sigma-algebra included in 3. The 
interpretation should be that E[X) GI is "the expectation of X given that we 
have access to the information in g". It is not trivial to formalize this rather 
vague notion, so we start with some heuristics. 
We therefore recall that the unconditional expected value is given by 
i.e. E[X] is a weighted average of the values of X, where we have used the 
"probabilities" P(&) as weights. 
Suppose now that we have obtained information about the outcome of the 
random experiment, in the sense that we know that sample point w is in the set B. 
The natural definition of the expected value of X given B is then obtained by 
taking the weighted average of X over the new effective sample space B. We 
must of course normalize the probability measure so that we have total mass 
equal to unity on the new space B. Thus we normalize the probabilities as 
and we may thus define the object E[XI B]. 
Definition B.24 Suppose B E 3 with P(B) > 0, and that X E L1 (R,3, P). 
Then "the conditional expectation of X given B" is defined by 
We now consider a slightly more general case, where we are given a finite par- 
tition P = {Al,. . . ,AK) with A, E 3 for n = 1,. . . , K. Having access to the 
information contained in P is, according to our earlier discussion, equivalent to 
knowing exactly in which of the components Al, . . . , AK that the outcome w lies. 
Now consider the following schedule: 
Someone (the God of Chance?) chooses "randomly" a point w in the sample 
space. We do not know exactly which point has been chosen. 
We are informed about in exactly which component of the partition that 
w lies. 
As soon as we know in which component w lies, say for example in A,, 
then we can compute the conditional expectation of X given A, according 
to the formula above. 
From this we see that exactly which conditional expectation that we will com- 
pute, will depend in which component that w lies. We may therefore define 
a mapping from R to the real line by 
This leads us to the following definition. 

434 
PROBABILITY THEORY 
Definition B.25 With assumptions as above, and also assuming that P(A,) > 0 
for all n, we define E[X(P],"the conditional expectation of X given the 
information in P" by 
i. e. 
1 
E [ X (  P] (w) = - 
X(w)DPP(w), when w E A,. 
(B.4) 
We note that the object E[XI P] 
is not a real number but a mapping from 
R to R, i.e. it is a random variable. We also note that, by definition, E [ X J  PI 
is constant on each component of P ,  i.e. it is u {P)-measurable. 
We would now like to extend the definition above to the case when we con- 
dition on a general sigma-algebra, and not only on a finite partition. This is 
however not entirely straightforward, and a major problem with the definition 
above is that we had to assume that P(A,) > 0 for all n, since otherwise we 
divide by zero in (B.4). We therefore have to take a more indirect approach, and 
start by listing some important properties of the conditional expectation above. 
Proposition B.26 Assume that (R,3, P), x, and P are as above. Define the 
sigma-algebra Q C 3 by Q = a ( P ) .  Then the conditional expectation E[XI PI 
is characterized as the unique random variable Z on ( 0 , 3 ,  P )  with the following 
properties: 
(i) Z is G measurable. 
I 
(ii) For every E Q it holds that 
I 
tl 
I 
Proof Exercise for the reader. 
I 
il 1 
The point of this result is that it characterizes the conditional expectation in 
a way which does not require the components of P to have strictly positive 
probabilities. In fact, the conditions (i)-(ii) above can be formulated for any 
sigrntlalgebra Q even if Q is not generated by a finite partition. This is the 
starting point for our final definition of conditional expectations. 
Definition B.27 Let (R, 3 ,  P )  be a probability space and X a random variable 
in L1 (R,3, P). Let furthermom Q be a sigma-algebra such that G G 3. If Z is 
] 
a mndom variable with the properties that 
(i) Z is Q-measurable. 
I 

i 
CONDITIONAL EXPECTATIONS 
! (ii) For every G E Q it holds that 
Then we say that Z is the conditional expectation of X given the sigma- 
algebra Q. In that case we denote Z by the symbol 
The price that we have to pay for this very general definition of conditional 
expectation is that we have a nontrivial existence problem, since it is not imme- 
diately clear that in the general case there will always exist a random variable Z 
j 
as above. We note that X itself will obviously always satisfy (ii), but in the 
general case it will not satisfy (i). We do however have an existence result, and 
the proof is a nice application of the Radon-Nikodym Theorem. 
Theorem B.28 Let (R,T, P ) ,  X ,  and Q be as in Definition B.27. Then the 
following hold: 
There will always exist a random variable Z satisfying conditions (2)-(ii) 
above. 
The variable Z is unique, i.e. if both Y and Z satisfy (2)-(ii) then Y = Z, 
P-a.s. 
Proof Define the measure v on (R, 9) by 
Trivially we then have v << P and we see directly by inspection that if we define Z 
by 
then Z will be Q-measurable and it will have the property that 
i.e 
for all G E 8. 
In passing we note that if B is the trivial sigma-algebra Q = {R,0) then it follows 
directly from the definition above (prove this!) that 

436 
PROBABILITY THEORY 
We now have some natural and simple rules for calculating conditional 
expectations. 
Proposition B.29 The following hold: 
E[aX + PYI S] = aE[XI S] + PE[Y( S] , Va, /3 E R. 
(B.7) I 
Proof The relation (B.6) follows more or less directly from Proposition A.26. 
In order to prove (B.7) we define Z by Z = aE[XI 81 + PE[YI GI. Then Z is 
obviously S-measurable and we only have to show that for every G E S we have I 
Using the definition of the conditional expectation and linearity, the right-hand 
side of the above becomes 
One of the 
expectation 
, most important and frequently 
is the rule of iterated expectations. 
JG 
used 
JG ' 
properties 
. 
, 
of conditioi 
SUP
inte
t aim 
can 
the 
Prc 
Pr<
intc
Ass
defi
De
: 
Sin
t ior 
Proposition B.30 Assume the setting above and also assume that the sigma- 
algebra % satisfies % C 8 G 3. Then the following hold: 
E[E[XI GI1 'FI] = E[XI XI, 
(B.8) 
E[X] = E[E[XI GI]. 
(B.9) 
inst
Proof We start by noting that (B.9) is a special case of (B.8) since E[X] = 
E[X( %] where 7-i is the trivial sigma-algebra. In order to prove (B.8) we define 
Z by Z = E[X( %I. We now have to show that Z is %-measurable and that for 
all events H E % we have 
I 
whc 
(B.lO) 
The measurability is immediately clear (why?). As for (B.lO) we note that 
foll 
since % S we have H E % +  H E S so 
I 
Pr,

CONDITIONAL EXPECTATIONS 
437 
Suppose now that X is G-measurable. We have earlier said that the intuitive 
interpretation of this is that X is uniquely determined by the information con- 
tained in G. When we condition on G this should imply that we know X and thus 
can treat it as deterministic (conditionally on G). This intuition is formalized by 
the following result, where we leave the proof as an exercise. 
Proposition B.31 I X is G-measurable and if X, Y ,  and XY are in L1, then 
There is a Jensen inequality also for conditional expectations. 
Proposition B.32 Assume that f : R -r R is convex and that X and f (X) are 
integrable. Then 
f (E[XlG1)SE[f(X)IGl, P-a.s. 
Assume that X and Y are defined on the same space (R, T, P). Then we can 
define the conditional expectation of Y, given X. 
Definition B.33 For any integrable Y and for any X ,  we define 
Since E[Y I X] by this definition automatically is a {XI-measurable, Proposi- 
tion B.14 guarantees that there exists a Bore1 function g such that 
using this g we may now define conditional expectations on the distribution side 
instead of on the R side. 
Definition B.34 We define the object ,E[YI X = x] by 
where g is given by (B.13). 
Fkom the law of iterated expectations and Proposition B.4 we obtain the 
following result, which should be well known from elementary probability theory. 
Proposition B.35 If px denotes the distribution measure for X then, for any 
random variable Y :  

438 
PROBABILITY THEORY 
If X and 6 are independent, i.e. if u {X) and 6 are independent sigma-algebras, 
then it seems reasonable to expect that 9 does not contain any information about 
X. The technical formulation of this intuition is as follows. 
Proposition B.36 Assume that X is integrable, and that X and 6 are 
independent. Then 
E [ Y  I X ]  = E [ Y ] .  
Proof Left as an exercise. 
It is well known that E [ X ]  is the optimal mean square deterministic predictor 
of X. The corresponding result for conditional expectations is as follows. 
Proposition B.37 Let (R,3, P) be a given probability space, let 6 be a sub- 
sigma-algebra o f 3  and let X be a square integrable random variable. 
Consider the problem of minimizing 
where Z is allowed to vary over the class of all square integrable 6-measurable 
random variables. The optimal solution 2 is then given by 
Proof Left to the reader. See the exercises for a hint. 
. 
In geometrical terms this means that E[XI 61 is the orthogonal projection (in 
L2 (R, 3 ,  P)) of X onto the closed subspace L2 (R, G ,  P). For square integrable 
random variables one may in fact use this as the definition of the conditional 
expectation. This definition can then be extended from L2 to L1 by continuity, 
since L~ is dense in L1. 
B.6 Equivalent Probability Measures 
In this section we discuss absolute continuity and equivalence for the particular 
case of probability measures. The results in this section will be heavily used in 
Chapter 10. 
Let therefore P and Q be probability measures on (R,3). We immediately 
have the following simple result. 
Lemma B.38 For two probability measures P and Q, the relation P 
Q on 3 
holds if and only if 
P(A) = 1 + Q(A) = 1, 
for all A E 3. 
(B. 14) 
Proof Exercise for the reader. 
i 
In t 
ent 
ever 
imp 
P(/ 
the 
r 
has 
for 2 
alge 
L" 
6-n: 
Prc 
Raa 
Prc 
and 
whe 

EQUIVALENT PROBABILITY MEASURES 
439 
In the context of probability measures we thus notice that although two equival- 
I ent measures P and Q may assign completely different probabilities to a fixed 
event A, but all events which axe impossible under P (i.e. P(A) = 0) are also 
impossible under Q. Equivalently, all events which are certain under P (i.e. 
P(A = I)), are also certain under Q. It also follows directly (prove this!) from 
the definition that if an event A has strictly positive P-probability, then it also 
has strictly positive Q-probability (and vice versa). 
From the Radon-Nikodym Theorem we know that Q << P on the probability 
space ( Q 3 )  if and only if there exists 3-measurable mapping L : R -+ R+ 
such that 
L 
~ Q ( W )  = J1 ~ ( w )  
dp(w) 
(B.15) 
for all A E 3. Since Q is a probability measure L must also have the property that 
In other words, the Radon-Nikodym derivative L is a nonnegative random vari- 
able with EP[L] = 1, and it is often referred to as the likelihood ratio between 
Q and P. Written in terms of expected values, it follows from (B.15) that, for 
any random variable X E L1 (Q) we have 
EQ[x] = E ~ [ L  
- X ]  . 
(B. 16) 
Suppose now that Q << P on 3 and that we also have a smaller sigma- 
algebra G E 3 .  We then have two Radon-Nikodym derivatives; LF on 3 ,  and 
LB on 6, and these are typically not equal, since L7 will generically not be 
Q-measurable. The following result shows how they are related. 
Proposition B.39 Assume that Q << P o n  3 and that G C 3. Then the 
Radon-Nzkodym derivatives LF and LB are related by 
Proof We have to show that EP[LF\ G] is G-measurable (which is obvious) 
and that, for any G E Q, 
This, however, follows immediately from the trivial calculation 
where we have used the fact that G E b F. 

440 
PROBABILITY THEORY 
Example B.40 To see an example of the result above let 
= {1,2,3} and 
Intc 
define 
3 = 2 " ,  8 =  {fl,@,{1},{2,3}} 
and 
P(l) = 4, 
P(2) = g , 
P(3) = +, 
Thl 
Q ( l ) = i ,  
Q(2)=3, 
Q(3)=5. 
EP
We see directly that 
and it is obvious that L7 is not 8-measurable. Since P({2,3}) = 314, and 
Q({2,3}) = 213, the local scale factor on {2,3} is 918, so LP is given by 
and we also have the simple calculation 
The formula (B.16) gives us expectations under Q in terms of expectations 
under P, and a natural question is how conditional expected values under Q are 
related to conditional expectations under P. The following very useful result, 
known as the "Abstract Bayes' Formula" solves this problem. 
Proposition B.41 (Bayes' Theorem) Assume that X is a random variable 
on (R,3, P), and let Q be another probability measure on (R, 3) with Radon- 
Nikodvm derivative 
Assume that X E L1 (R, 3, Q) and that 6 is a sigma-algebra with 8 C 3. Then 
Proof We start by proving that 
We show this by proving that for an arbitrary G E G the P-integral of both sides 
coincide. The left-hand side becomes 
I 
Exc 
i 
i 
Exc 
Exc 
at01
aPP
Exc 
Exc 
Ass

EXERCISES 
Integrating the right-hand side we obtain 
1 
Thus (B.19) holds P-as. and since Q << P also Q-a.s. It remains to show that 
E ~ [ L I  
Q] # 0 Q-a.s. but this follows from the calculation 
Q ( E ~ I L I  
GI = 0) = 1 
dQ = iEp[LIP]=O) 
L d P  
{EPILIP]=O} 
E ~ [ L I  
Q] d~ = 0. 
= i E p [ L I P ] = O ]  
B.7 Exercises 
Exercise B.l Prove Proposition B.4 by carrying out the following steps: 
Prove the proposition in the case when g = IA where A is an arbitrary 
Bore1 set. 
Prove that the proposition holds when g is a simple function. 
You can WLOG assume that g is nonnegative (why?), so now approximate 
g by simple functions. 
Exercise B.2 Prove Proposition B.lO. 
Exercise B.3 Prove Proposition B.12. 
Exercise B.4 Prove Corollary B.22. 
Exercise B.5 Prove Proposition B.26. 
Exercise B.6 Prove (B.6) by using Proposition A.26. 
Exercise B.7 Prove Proposition B.31 by first proving it when X is an indic- 
ator function, then extend by linearity to simple functions and at last by 
approximating X with a sequence of simple functions. 
Exercise B.8 Prove Proposition B.31 by the following steps: 
Choose a fixed X. 
Show that for any A E a {X) you have E[ IA 1 Q] = E[IA]. 
Extend by linearity to simple a {XI-measurable functions and at last by 
approximating X with a sequence of simple functions. 
Exercise B.9 Let h : R + R be a function such that h > 0, h' 2 0 and h(0) =O. 
Assume that X is a nonnegative random variable. Prove that 
~ [ h ( x ) ]  
= JW 
h1(t)p(x t )  dt. 
0 

442 
PROBABILITY THEORY 
Exercise B.10 Prove Proposition B.36 by starting with the case when X = IA 
and then do the usual steps. 
Exercise B.ll Prove Proposition B.37 by going along the following lines: 
Prove that the "estimation error" X-  
E[X( Q] is orthogonal to L2 (0, Q, P) 
in the sense that for any Z E L2 (0, Q, P) we have 
Now prove the proposition by writing 
and use the result just proved. 
B.8 Notes 
For the mathematician, Durrett (1996) is a very good standard reference on prob- 
ability theory. For the economist (and also for many mathematicians) the recent 
text by Jacod and Protter (2000) is the perfect, and amazingly far reaching, 
reference. 
C.l 
Let 
in ( 
Not 
In z 
tim 
1 
so* 
Pro 
war 
also 
in a 
SO 1 
For 
pro1 
typi 
in t 
zerc 
For 
mar 
Prc 
is a 

l
*
 
5 
;'~%,A'F~C@& 
Appendix C 
MARTINGALES AND STOPPING TIMES* 
C.l Martingales 
Let (R, F, 
P, E) be a filtered probability space, and let X be a random process 
in continuous or discrete time. 
Definition C.l The process X is an 3-martingale if 
1. X is 3-adapted. 
2. Xt E L1 for each t. 
3. For every s and t with 0 5 s 5 t it holds that 
If the equality sign is replaced by 5 (2) then x is said to be a submartingale 
(supermartingale). 
Note that the martingale property is always with respect to some given filtration. 
In all honesty it should be mentioned that while martingale theory in discrete 
time is a fairly straightforward activity, martingale theory in continuous time is 
sometimes rather complicated and there are lots of highly nontrivial technical 
problems. In order for the theory to work well in continuous time we typically 
want our processes to have right continuous trajectories with left limits, and we 
also need to assume that the filtration E has some regularity properties. However, 
in almost all concrete situations these technical problems can be taken care of, 
so with almost no danger the reader can safely forget about the technicalities. 
For the rest of this book we simply ignore these problems. Below we only give 
proofs for the discrete time case. The proofs for the continuous time results are 
typically obtained by sampling the continuous time processes at discrete points 
in time and then performing a limiting argument. 
It follows immediately from the definition, that a martingale is characterized 
by the property that the conditional expectations of a forward increment equals 
zero, i.e. that 
E [ X t  - XsI Fs] = 0, for all s 5 t. 
For martingales in discrete time, it is in fact enough to demand that the 
martingale property holds for one single time step. 
Proposition C.2 A n  adapted integrable discrete time process {X,; n = 0,1, . . .) 
is a martingale w.r.t. the filtration {F,; n = 0,1,. . .) if and only if 

I' 
444 
MARTINGALES AND STOPPING TIMES 
Proof Easy exercise. 
Two of the most common types of martingales are the following. 
Example C.3 Let Y be any integrable random variable on the filtered space 
(Q, 3, P, Z), and define the process X by 
Then it is an easy exercise to see that X is an 3t-martingale. In particular, this 
implies that on a compact interval [0, TI any given martingale M is always 
generated by its final value MT by the formula 
Note that this only holds on a finite closed interval. The more complicated case 
of an infinite or open interval will be discussed below. 
Example C.4 If X is a process with independent increments on (Q, 3, P, 3), 
and if also E [Xt - X,] = 0, for all s, t, then X is a martingale. 
Example C.5 Let (2,; n = 1,2,. . .} be a family of independent integrable 
random variables, and define the discrete time process X by 
then X is a martingale w.r.t. the filtration FX. 
There is a close connection between martingale theory, the theory of con- 
vex functions, and the theory of harmonic functions. The correspondence is as 
follows: 
Martingale theory Convex theory Harmonic theory 
martingale 
linear function 
harmonic function 
submartingale 
convex function 
subharmonic function 
supermartingale 
concave function superharmonic function 
We will not go deeper into this, but from convexity theory we recognize 
directly the structure of the following result. 
Proposition C.6 Let X be a process on (Q,3, P, E) 
a If X is a martingale and i f f  : R -, R is a convex (concave) function such 
that f (Xt) is integrable for all t, then the process Y defined by 
is a submartingale (supermartingale). 
an,
[O,
I 
We 
De
con
Prc 
intt
by -
the 
Prc 
imp

MARTINGALES 
445 
a If X is a submartingale and if f : R -t R is a convex nondecreasing 
function such that f (Xt) is integrable for all t, then the process Y defined by 
is a submartingale. 
Proof Jensen's inequality for conditional expectations. 
On every finite interval [0, TI, every martingale X is of the form 
and a natural question is if every martingale X also on the infinite interval 
[0, oo] has a representation of this form, i.e. if there always exists some random 
variable X, 
such that 
xt =E[XwI3tl. 
((3.4) 
In general the answer is no, and a symmetric random walk on the integers is 
a typical counter example. In order to have a representation of the form (C.4) 
one needs some further integrability of X. We will not prove the most general 
(and hard) version of the results but for completeness, sake we will cite the most 
general convergence theorem without proof. 
Theorem C.7 Suppose that X is a submartingale satisfying the condition 
sup E [x:] < oo. 
t2o ' 
Then there exists a random variable Y such that Xt + Y ,  P-a.s. 
We now move to the more manageable quadratic case. 
Definition C.8 A martingale X is called square integrable if there exists a 
constant M such that 
1 
We now have the following nice result. 
Proposition C.9 (Martingale Convergence) Assume that x is a square 
integrable martingale. Then there exists a random variable, which we denote 
by Xw, such that Xt -t X, 
in L2 and P-as. as t -t oo. Furthermore we have 
the representation 
Xt=E[X,1,Ft], 
f o r a l l t L 0 .  
(c.5) 
1 
Proof Since x - 
x2 is convex, the process Xz is a submartingale, which 
1 
implies that the mapping mt = E [x:] is nondecreasing. The assumption that 


## Forwards and Futures

446 
MARTINGALES AND STOPPING TIMES 
X is square integrable is thus equivalent to the existence of a real number c < oo 
such that mt t c. We will now prove L2-convergence by showing that Xt is 
Cauchy in L2. We have 
= E [E [x: - 2XaXt + x:] Fa]] 
= E [X:] - 2E [XaE [Xt 1 Fa]] + E [x:] 
= E [X:] - E [x:] = mt - m,. 
Since mt + c it follows that mt is Cauchy and thus that Xt is Cauchy in L2. 
Since L2 is complete this implies the existence of a random variable Y E L2 such 
that Xt + Y in L2. The almost sure convergence then follows from Theorem C.7 
In order to prove (C.5), it is enough (why?) to show that for every s and every 
A E 3. we have 
J,X.~P=I,Y~P, 
and this follows easily from the fact that for every t > s the martingale property 
implies that 
If now t + oo, it follows (how?) from the L2-convergence that, as t -+ 
oo, 
we have 
C.2 
Discrete Stochastic Integrals 
In this section, we discuss briefly the simplest type of stochastic integration, 
namely integration of discrete time processes. This will thus serve as an intro- 
duction to the more complicated Wiener case later on, and it is also important 
in its own right. The central concept here is that of a predictable process. 
Definition C.10 Consider a filtered space (R,F, P , z )  in discrete time, i.e. 
n=0,1,2 ,.... 
A random process X is 2-predictable zf, for each n, Xn is Fn-l 
measurable. Here we use the convention F-1 = FO. 
a For any random process X, the increment process AX is defined by 
with the convention X-1 = 0. 
c.:
Ma 
for]
an(
anc
the
e 
Thf 
atic
usec 

LIKELIHOOD PROCESSES 
447 
For any two processes X and Y , the discrete stochastic integral process 
X * Y is defined by 
Instead of (X * Y), we will sometimes write 
X, dY,. 
Note that a predictable process is "known one step ahead in time". The reason 
why we define AX by "backward increments" is that in this way AX is adapted, 
whenever X is. 
The main result for stochastic integrals is that when you integrate a 
predictable process X w.r.t. a martingale M, the result is a new martingale. 
Proposition C.ll Assume that the space (fl,3, P, 3) carries the processes X 
and M where X is predictable, M is a martingale, and Xn(AM), is integrable 
for each n. Then the stochastic integral X * M is a martingale. 
Proof Left as an exercise to the reader. 
C.3 Likelihood Processes 
Martingale theory is closely connected with absolutely continuous measure trans- 
formations and arbitrage theory. This will be discussed in detail in Chapter 10 
and here we will only state some basic facts. 
We consider a filtered probability space (fl, 3, P, z) on a compact interval 
[0, TI. Suppose now that LT is some nonnegative integrable random variable 
in FT. We can then define a new measure Q on FT by setting 
and if 
E~ [LT] = 1, 
the new measure will also be a probability measure. 
From its definition, LT will be the Radon-Nikodym derivative of Q w.r.t. P 
on FT so Q << P on FT. Hence we will also have Q << P on Ft for all t 5 T 
and thus, by the Radon-Nikodym Theorem, there will exist a random process 
{Lt; 0 5 t 5 T) defined by 
The L process is known as the likelihood process for the measure transform- 
ation from P to Q and it has the following fundamental property, which will be 
used frequently. 

448 
MARTINGALES AND STOPPING TIMES 
Proposition C.12 With assumptions as above, the likelihood process L, defined 
by ((2.8) is a (P,.F)-martingale. 
Proof The statement follows directly from Proposition B.39. 
Using the likelihood process, we can also characterize a Q-martingale in terms 
of the P measure. 
Proposition C.13 A process M is a Q-martingale if and only if the process 
L - M is a P-martingale. 
Proof Exercise for the reader. 
0 
C.4 Stopping Times 
Consider again a filtered space (a, F ,  P, .F) and a martingale X on the space. 
A natural question, which we will encounter in connection with American 
options, is whether the martingale property also holds when the deterministic 
times are replaced by stochastic times, i.e. whether we always have the equality 
where S and T are random times with S 5 T. It is rather clear that we cannot 
expect a strong theory unless we restrict the study to those random times which 
in some sense are adapted to the information flow given by the filtration. These 
are the so called stopping times. 
Definition C.14 A stopping time w.r.t. the filtration .F 2:s a nonnegative 
random variable T such that 
A stopping time is thus characterized by the fact that at any time t we can, 
based upon the information available at t, decide whether T has occurred or 
not. This definition may seem a bit abstract, but in most concrete situations it 
is very easy to see whether a random time is a stopping time or not. A typical 
example of a stopping time is obtained if X is an adapted discrete time process 
and we define T as a hitting time i.e. we define T by 
where A C R is some Bore1 set. T is thus the first time when X enters into 
the set A, and intuitively it is obvious that we can decide whether the event 
{T 5 n) has occurred, based upon observations of X at the times O,1,2,. . . , n. 
In 
oby 
1 
ba
thi
fut
we 
t io.
t '"
ter 
Prc 
(0,
cast 
Del 
ana 
Prc 
iten

STOPPING TIMES 
449 
Thus T is a stopping time, and we obtain a formal proof by choosing a fixed n 
and noting that 
n 
{T(w) < n) = {Xt(w) E A, for some t 5 n) = U {Xt E A). 
t=O 
Since X is adapted we have {Xt E A) E 3 t  Tt Fn, so {T I n) E 3n. 
A typical example of a random time which is not a stopping time is given by 
T(w) = sup{n 2 0; X, E A). 
In this definition, T is thus the last time that X visits A, and it is again intuitively 
obvious that in the generic case we cannot decide whether T has occurred or not 
based upon the basis of observations upon Xo, XI, 
. . . Xn since this would imply 
that at time n we already know if X will visit A or not at some time in the 
future. 
In order to be able to even formulate the equality (C.9) we must define what 
we mean by the expression FT for a stopping time T. Intuitively the interpreta- 
tion is of course that 3T = "the information generated by the flow 3 up to the 
random time T", but it is not obvious how to formalize this in mathematical 
terms. The generally accepted definition is the following. 
Definition C.15 Let T be an 3 stopping time. The sigma-algebra FT is defined 
as the class of events satisfying 
We now have some natural results. 
Proposition C.16 Let S and t be stopping times on the filtered space 
(R,3, P,.F), and let X be an adapted process, which in the continuous time 
case is assumed to have trajectories which are either left- or right-continuous. 
Define V and A by x V y = max [x, y] and x A y = min [x, y] for any real number, 
and define S V T by (S V T)(w) = S(w) V T(w). Then the following hold: 
If S 5 T ,  P-a.s. then FS C_ FT. 
S V T and X A T are stopping times. 
If T is P-as. finite or if X, 
is well defined in Fm, then XT is 
FT-me~s~7mb1e. 
Proof The first two items are left as easy exercises, and we prove the third 
item only for the discrete time case. To show that XT is FT-measurable we have 

450 
MARTINGALES AND STOPPING TIMES 
to show that {XT E B )  E FT for every Bore1 set B ,  so we thus have to show 
that for every n we have {XT E B )  n { T  5 n )  E Fn. 
We obtain 
{XT E B ) ~ { T  
< n )  = { X T  E ~
)
n
 
U { ~ = k )  
= U ({x* 
E B ) ~ { T =  k ) ) .  
k=o 
k = ~  
(C.13) 
Since X is adapted and T is a stopping time, {Xk E B )  and {T = k) are in 
Fk which is included in Fn. 
We now prove that the martingale property is stable under stopping. 
Proposition C.17 Let X be a martingale and let T be a stopping time. Then 
the stopped process xT, defined by 
is a martingale. 
Proof We only give the proof for the discrete time case. For this we define the 
process h by hn = I {n 5 T )  , n = 0,1,2. . ., where I denotes the indicator of 
the event within the bracket. Now, { n  5 T )  = {T < n)' = { T  5 n - 1)'. Since 
T is a stopping time we thus see that h, E 3n-1 
so h is predictable. Furthermore 
we have the obvious equality 
so from Proposition C.ll we see that xT is a martingale. 
We finish by stating a fairly general version of the "optional sampling theorem" 
which shows that the martingale property is preserved under random sampling, 
but we only give the proof for a simple special case. 
Theorem C.18 (The Optional Sampling Theorem) Assume that X is a 
martingale satisfying 
sup E [x:] 1 
00 
t2o 
Let S and T be stopping times such that S 5 T. Then 
If X is a submartingale satisfying the same integrability condition then (C.15) 
holds with = replaced by 2. 
B3 
us.
C.
I 
Er 
spi 
Eli 
utt 
fur 
[ 
Ex
ind 

EXERCISES 
451 
Proof We will be content with proving the result in discrete time and for the 
case when X is a martingale, the submartingale case being a bit harder. From 
Proposition C.9 it follows that there exists an integrable random variable Y 
such that 
Xn=EIYIFn], n=0,1, .... 
(C.16) 
It is thus enough (why?) to show that for any stopping time T we have 
i.e. we have to show that for every A E FT we have 
By writing A as A = Un (A n {T = n)), noting that A n {T = n) E Fn, and 
using (C.16) we obtain 
C. 5 Exercises 
Exercise C.l Show that for any integrable random variable Y on a filtered 
space (a, 3, P, E), the process X defined by 
is a martingale. 
Exercise C.2 Let (2,) be a sequence of i.i.d. (independent identically distrib- 
uted) random variables with finite exponential moments of all orders. Dehe the 
function cp : R -t R by 
cp(X) = E [eXZn] , 
and define the process X by 
eASn 
n 
xn = - 
[cp(X)ln ' 
where Sn = 
Zk. 
k=l 
Prove that X is an Fn-martingale, where Fn = o {Zi; i = 1,. . . , n). 
Exercise C.3 Prove that, for any stopping time T, FT, defined by (C.lO) is 
indeed a sigm&algebra. 
Exercise C.4 Prove Proposition C. 11. 

452 
MARTINGALES AND STOPPING TIMES 
Exercise C.5 Prove Proposition C.6. 
Exercise C.6 Show that in discrete time, the defining property {T 5 t )  E 3 t  
for a stopping time, can be replaced by the weaker condition 
{T = n) E Fn, for all n. 
Exercise C.7 Prove the first two items in Proposition C.16. 
Exercise C.8 A Wiener process W is a continuous time process with Wo = 0, 
continuous trajectories, and Gaussian increments such that for s < t the incre 
ment Wt - W, is normally distributed with mean zero and variance t - s. 
Furthermore the increment Wt - W, is independent of 3,, where the filtration 
is the internal one generated by W. 
(i) Show that W is a martingale. 
(ii) Show that W2 - t is a martingale. 
(iii) Show that for any real number X 
exp(XWt - At) 
is a martingale. 
(iv) For b < 0 < a we define the stopping time T as the first time that W 
hits one of the "barriers" a or b, i.e. 
Define pa and pb as 
pa = P (W hits the a barrier before hitting the b barrier,) 
pb = P (W hits the b barrier before hitting the a barrier,) 
SO pa = P(WT = a) and pa = P(WT = b). Use the fact that every 
stopped martingale is a martingale to infer that ,E[WT] = 0, and show 
that 
-b 
a 
p
a
=
~
,
 
Pb = - 
a+b' 
You may, without proof, use the fact that P(T < oo) = 1. 
(v) Use the technique above to show that 
(vi) Let T be as above and let b = -a. Use the Optional Sampling Theorem, 
Proposition C.17 and item (iii) above to show that the Laplace transform 
cp(X) of the distribution of T is given by 
Exercise C.9 Prove Proposition C.13. 
Hint: Use the Bayes
7 Formula (B.18). 

REFERENCES 
Amin, K. & Jarrow, R. (1991). Pricing Foreign Currency Options under 
Stochastic Interest Rates. Journal of International Money and Finance 10, 
310-329. 
Anderson, N., Breedon, F., Deacon, M., Derry, A. & Murphy, G. (1996). 
Estimating and Interpreting the Yield Curve. Wiley, Chichester. 
Artzner, P. & Delbaen, F. (1989). Term Structure of Interest Rates: The 
Martingale Approach. Advances in Applied Mathematics 10, 95-129. 
Barone-Adesi, G. & Elliott, R. (1991). Approximations for the Values of 
American Options. Stochastic Analysis and Applications 9, 115-131. 
Benninga, S., Bjork, T. & Wiener, Z. (2002). On the Use of Numeraires in 
Option Pricing. Journal of Derivatives 10(2), 43-58. 
Bhar, R. & Chiarella, C. (1997). Transformation of Heath-Jarrow-Morton 
Models to Markovian Systems. European Journal of Finance 3(1), 1-26. 
Bingham, N. & Kiesel, R. (1998). Risk-Neutral Valuation. Springer Verlag, 
Berlin. 
Bjork, T. (1995). On the Term Structure of Discontinuous Interest Rates. 
Obozrenie Prikladnoi i Promyshlennoi Matematiki 2, 627-657 (in Russian). 
Bjork, T. (1997). Interest Rate Theory. In W. Runggaldier (ed.), Financial 
Mathematics. Springer Lecture Notes in Mathematics, Vol. 1656. Springer 
Verlag, Berlin. 
Bjork, T., di Masi, G., Kabanov, Y. & Runggaldier, W. (1997~). Towards a 
General Theory of Bond Markets. Finance and Stochastics 1, 141-174. 
Bjork, T., Kabanov, Y. & Runggaldier, W. (1997b). Bond Market Structure in 
the Presence of Marked Point Processes. Mathematical Finance 7, 211-239. 
Bjork, T. & Christensen, B.J. (1999). Interest Rate Dynamics and Consistent 
Forward Rate Curves. Mathematical Finance 9(4), 323-348. 
Bjork, T. (2001). A Geometric View of Interest Rate Theory. In E. Jouini, 
J. Cvitanic and M. Musiela (eds), Option Pricing, Interest Rates and Risk 
Management. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. 
Bj&k, T. & Gombani, A. (1999). Minimal Realization of Interest Rate Models. 
Finance and Stochastics 3(4), 413432. 
Bj&k, T. & Land&, C. (2002). On the Construction of Finite Dimensional Real- 
izations for Nonlinear Forward Rate Models. Finance and Stochastics 6(3), 
303-331. 
Bjork, T. & Svensson, L. (2001). On the Existence of Finite Dimensional real- 
izations for Nonlinear Forward Rate Models. Mathematical Finance 11 (2), 
205-243. 
Bjork, T., Myhrman, J. & Persson, M. (1987). Optimal Consumption with 
Stochastic Prices in Continuous Time. Journal of Applied Probability 24, 
3547. 

454 
REFERENCES 
Black, F. (1976). The Pricing of Commodity Contracts. Journal of Financial 
Economics 3, 167-179. 
Black, F., Derman, E. & Toy, W. (1990). A OnsFactor Model of Interest Rates 
and its Application to Treasury Bond Options. Financial Analysts Journal 
Jan.-Feb., 33-39. 
Black, F. & Scholes, M. (1973). The Pricing of Options and Corporate Liabilities. 
Journal of Political Economy 81, 65W83. 
Borodin, A. & Salminen, P. (1997). Handbook of Brownian Motion. Birkhauser 
Verlag, Basel. 
Brace, A. & Musiela, M. (1994). A Multifactor Gauss Markov Implementation 
of Heath, Jarrow, and Morton. Mathematical Finance 4, 254-283. 
Brace, A., Gatarek, D. & Musiela, M. (1997). The Market Model of Interest 
Rate Dynamics. Mathematical Finance 7, 127-154. 
Brennan, M. J. & Schwartz, E.S. (1979). A Continuous Time Approach to Pricing 
Bonds. Journal of Banking and Finance July, 133-155. 
Brockett, R.W. (1970). Finite Dimensional Linear Systems. Wiley. 
Brockett, R.W. (1981). Nonlinear systems and nonlinear estimation theory. In 
M. Hazewinkel and J.C. Willems (eds), Stochastic Systems: The Mathematics 
of Filtering and Identification and Applications. Reidel. 
Brennan, M.J. & Schwartz, E.S. (1982). An Equilibrium Model of Bond Pricing 
and a Test of Market Efficiency. Journal of Financial and Quantitative 
Analysis 17(3), 301-329. 
Brigo, D. & Mercurio, F. (2001). Interest Rate Models. Springer Verlag, Berlin 
Heidelberg. 
Carr, P. (1995). Two Extensions to Barrier Option Valuation. Applied Mathem- 
atical Finance 2, 173-209. 
Carverhill, A. (1994). When is the spot rate Markovian? Mathematical Finance 
4, 305-312. 
Cheyette, 0. (1996). Markov Representation of the Heath-Jarrow-Morton 
Model. Preprint. BARRA Inc. 
Chiarella, C. & Kwon, K. (2001). Forward rate dependent Markovian trans- 
formations of the Heath-Jarrow-Morton term structure model. Finance and 
Stochastics 5, 237-257. 
Cochrane, J. (2001). Asset Pricing. Princeton University Press, Princeton, N.J. 
Conze, A. & Viswanathan, R. (1991). Path Dependent Options: The Case of 
Lookback Options. Journal of Finance 46, 1893-1907. 
Cox, J.C. & Huang, C.F. (1989). Optimal Consumption and Portfolio Choice 
when Asset Prices Follow a Diffusion Process. Journal of Economic Thwry 
49, 33-83. 
Cox, J., Ingersoll, J. & Ross, S. (1981). A Rsexamination of Traditional Expect- 
ation Hypotheses about the Term Structure of Interest Rates. Journal of 
Finance 36, 769-799. 
Cox, J.C., Ingersoll, J. & Ross, S. (1985~). An Intertemporal General Equili- 
brium Model of Asset Prices. Econometrics 53, 363-384. 

REFERENCES 
455 
Cox, J., Ingersoll, J. & Ross, S. (1985b). A Theory of the Term Structure of 
Interest Rates. Econornetrica 53, 385-408. 
Cox, J., Ross, S. & Rubinstein, M. (1979). Option Pricing: A Simplified 
Approach. Journal of Financial Economics 7, 229-264. 
Cox, J. & Rubinstein, M. (1985). Options Markets. Prentice Hall, Englewood 
Cliffs, N.J. 
Cvitanib, J. (1997). Optimal Trading under Constraints. In W. Runggaldier 
(ed.), Financial Mathematics. Springer Lecture Notes in Mathematics, 
Vol. 1656. Springer Verlag, Berlin. 
Dana, R. & Jeanblanc, M. (2003). Financial Markets in Continuous Time. 
Springer Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg New York. 
Da Prato, G. & Zabczyk, J. (1992). Stochastic Equations in Infinite Dimensions. 
Cambridge University Press. 
Davis, M.H.A. & Norman, A. (1990). Portfolio Selection with Transaction Costs. 
Mathematics of Operations Research 15, 676-713. 
Davis, 
M.H.A. 
(1997). 
Option Pricing in Incomplete Markets. 
In 
M.A.H. Demptster and S. Pliska (eds), Mathematics of Derivative Securities. 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp. 216-226. 
Delbaen, F. (1992). Representing Martingale Measures when Asset Prices are 
Continuous and Bounded. Mathematical Finance 2, 107-130. 
Delbaen, F. & Schachermayer, W. (1994). A General Version of the Fundamental 
Theorem on Asset Pricing. Mathematishe Annalen 300, 463-520. 
Delbaen, F. & Schachermayer, W. (1998). The Fundamental Theorem for 
Unbounded Processes. Mathematishe Annalen 312, 215-250. 
Dellacherie, C. & Meyer, P.A. (1972). Probabilit6s et Potentiel. Hermann, Paris. 
Doob, J.L. (1984). Classical Potential Theory and its Probabilistic Counterpart. 
Springer Verlag, New York. 
Dothan, M. (1978). On the Term Structure of Interest Rates. Journal of 
Financial Economics 6, 59-69. 
Duffie, D. (1989). Futures Markets. Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, N.J. 
Duffie, D. (1994). Martingales, Arbitrage and Portfolio Choice. First European 
Congress of Mathematics, Vol. 11, Birkhauser Verlag, Basel, pp. 3-21. 
Duffie, D. (2001). Dynamic Asset Pricing (3rd edn). Princeton University Press, 
Princeton, N.J. 
Duffie, D. & Huang, C. (1986). Multiperiod Security Markets with Differential 
Information. Journal of Mathematical Economics 15, 283-303. 
Duffie, D. & Kan, R. (1996). A Yield Factor Model of Interest Rates. 
Mathematical Finance 6, 379-406. 
Duffie, D. & Singleton, K. (1994). Modeling Term Structures for Defaultable 
Bonds. Graduate School of Business, Stanford University. 
Durrett, R. (1996). Probability. Duxbury Press, Belmont. 
Elliott, R.J. (1982). Stochastic Calculus and Applications. Springer Verlag, 
New York. 
Fabozzi (1995). Bond Markets, Analysis and Strategies (3rd edn). Prentice Hall, 
Englewood Cliffs, N. J. 

456 
REFERENCES 
Filipovid, D. (1999) A Note on the Nelson-Siege1 Family. Mathematical Finance, 
9(4), 349-359. 
Filipovid, D. (2001). Consistency Problems for Heath-Jam-ow-Morton Interest 
Rate Models. Springer Lecture Notes in Mathematics, Vol. 1760. Springer 
Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg. 
Filipovid, D. & Teichrnann, J. (2001). Existence of Finite Dimensional Realiza- 
tions for Stochastic Equations. Journal of Functional Analysis (forthcoming). 
Fleming, W. & Rishel, R. (1975). Deterministic and Stochastic Optimal Control. 
Springer Verlag, New York Heidelberg Berlin. 
Fleming, W. & Soner, M. (1993). Controlled Markov Processes and Viscosity 
Solutions. Springer Verlag, New York. 
Follmer, H. & Sondermann, D. (1986). Hedging of Non-Fkdundant Contingent 
Claims under Incomplete Information. In W. Hildenbrand and Mas-Cole11 
(eds), Contributions to Mathematical Economics. North-Holland, Amsterdam. 
Frittelli, M. (2000). The Minimal Entropy Martingale Measure and the valuation 
Problem in Incomplete Markets. Mathematical Finance 10, 215-225. 
Garman, M. & Kohlhagen, S. (1983). Foreign Currency Option Values. Journal 
of International Money and Finance 2, 231-237. 
Geman, H. (1989). The Importance of the Forward Neutral Probability in a 
Stochastic Approach of Interest Rates. Working paper, ESSEC. 
Geman, H., El Karoui, N. & Rochet, J.C. (1995). Changes of Numkraire, 
Changes of Probability Measure and Option Pricing. Journal of Applied 
Probability 32, 443-458. 
Geske, R. (1979). The Valuation of Compound Options. Journal of Financial 
Economics 7, 63-81. 
Gerber, H. & Shiu, E. (1994). Option Pricing by Esscher Transforms. Bansac- 
tions of the Society of Actuaries 46, 51-92. 
Geske, R. & Johnson, H. (1984). The American Put Option Valued Analytically. 
Journal of Finance 39, 1511-1524. 
Goldman, M., Sosin, H. & Gatto, M. (1979). Path Dependent Options: "Buy at 
the High and Sell at the Low". Journal of Finance 34, 1111-1126. 
Hansen, L. & Jagannathan, R. (1991). Implications of Security Market 
Data for Modles of Dynamic Economies. Journal of Political Economy 99, 
225-262. 
Harrison, J. & Kreps, J. (1979). Martingales and Arbitrage in Multiperiod 
Securities Markets. Journal of Economic Theory 11, 418-443. 
Harrison, J. & Pliska, S. (1981). Martingales and Stochastic Integrals in 
the Theory of Continuous Trading. Stochastic Processes 6 Applications 11, 
215-260. 
Heath, D., Jarrow, R. & Morton, A. (1992). Bond Pricing and the Term 
Structure of Interest Rates. Ewnometrica 60(1), 77-106. 
He, H. & Pearson, N.D. (1991). Consuption and Portfolio Policies with Incom- 
plete Markets and Short-Sale Constraints: The Finite Dimensional Case. 
Mathematical Finance 1(1), 1-10. 

REFERENCES 
457 
Ho, T. & Lee, S. (1986). Term Structure Movements and Pricing Interest Rate 
Contingent Claims. Journal of Finance 41, 101 1-1029. 
Huang, C.F. & Litzenberger, R. (1988). Foundations for Financial Economics. 
North-Holland, Amsterdam. 
Hull, J. (1997). Options, htures, and Other Derivatives (3rd edn). Prentice 
Hall, Englewood Cliffs, N. J. 
Hull, J. & White, A. (1987). The Pricing of Options on Assets with Stochastic 
Volatilities. Journal of Finance 42, 281-300. 
Hull, J. & White, A. (1990). Pricing Interest-Rate Derivative Securities. The 
Review of Financial Studies 3, 573-592. 
Hunt, P. & Kennedy, J. (2000). Financial Derivatives in Theory and Practice. 
Wiley, Chichester. 
Ingersoll, J. (1987). Theory of Financial Decision Making. Rowman & Littlefield, 
Totowa, N.J. 
Inui, K. & Kijima, M. (1998). A markovian framework in multi-factor Heath- 
Jarrow-Morton models. JFQA 33(3), 423-440. 
Jacod, J. (1979). Calcul Stochastique et Probl2mes de Martingales. Springer 
Lecture Notes in Mathematics, Vol. 714. Springer Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg. 
Jacod, J. & Protter, P. (2000). Probability Essentials. Springer Verlag, Berlin 
Heidelberg. 
Jacod, J. & Shiryaev, A.N. (1987). Limit Theorems for Stochastic Processes. 
I 
Springer Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg. 
I 
Jamshidian, F. (1989). An Exact Bond Option Formula. Journal of Finance 44, 
205-209. 
Jamshidian, F. (1997). LIBOR and Swap Market Models and Measures. Finance 
and Stochastics 1, 293-330. 
Jarrow, R. & Madan, D. (1998). Valuing and Hedging Contingent Claims on 
Semimartingales. Finance and Stochastics 3, 111-134. 
Jarrow, R., Lando, D. & Turnbull, S. (1997). A Markov Model for the Term 
Structure of Credit Risk Spreads. Review of Financial Studies 10, 481-523. 
Jeffrey, A. (1995). Single factor Heath-Jarrow-Morton Term Structure Models 
Based on Markovian Spot Interest Rates. JFQA 30(4), 619-642. 
John, F. (1982). Partial Differential Equations. Springer Verlag, New York 
Heidelberg Berlin. 
Johnson, H. (1987). Options on the Maximum or the Minimum of Several Assets. 
Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 22, 277-283. 
Karatzas, I. & Shreve, S. (1988). Brownian Motion and Stochastic Calculus. 
Springer Verlag, New York Heidelberg Berlin. 
Karatzas, I., Lehoczky, J., Shreve, S. & Xu, G.L. (1991). Martingale and Duality 
Methods for Utility Maximization in an Incomplete Market. SIAM Journal of 
Control and Optimization 29, 702-730. 
Karatzas, I., Lehoczky, J. & Shreve, S. (1987). Optimal Portfolio and Consump 
tion Decision for a "Small Investor" on a Finite Horizon. SIAM Journal of 
Control and Optimization 26, 1157-1186. 

458 
REFERENCES 
Korn, R. (1997). Optimal Portfolios. World Scientific, Singapore. 
Kramkov, D. & Schachermayer, W. (1999). The Asymptotic Elasticity of Utility 
Functions and Optimal Investments in Incomplete Markets. Annals of Applied 
Probability 9(3), 904-950. 
Kreps, D. (1981). Arbitrage and Equilibrium in Economies with Infinitely Many 
Commodities. Journal of Mathematical Economics 8, 15-35. 
Krylov, R. (1980). Controlled Diffusion Processes. Springer Verlag, New York. 
Lando, D. (1997). Modelling Bonds and Derivatives with Credit Risk. In 
M. Dempster and S. Pliska (eds), Mathematics of Derivative Securities. 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. 
Leland, H. (1985). Option Pricing and Replication with Transaction Costs. 
Journal of Finance 47(4), 1283-1301. 
Leland, H. (1994). Risky Debts, Bond Covenants and Optimal Capital Structure. 
Journal of Finance 49(4), 1213-1252. 
Longstaff, F.A. & Schwartz, E.S. (1992). Interest Rate Volatility and the Term 
Structure. Journal of Finance 40, 1259-1282. 
Magshoodi, Y. (1996). Solution of the Extended CIR Term Structure and Bond 
Option Valuation. Mathematical Finance 6, 89-109. 
Margrabe, W. (1978). The Value of an Option to Exchange One Asset for 
Another. Journal of Finance 33, 177-186. 
Merton, R. (1969). Lifetime Portfolio Selection under Uncertainty. The Continu- 
ous Time Case. Review of Economics and Statistics 51, 247-257. 
Merton, R. (1971). Optimum Consumption and Portfolio Rules in a Continuous 
Time Model. Journal of Economic Thwry 3, 373413. 
Merton, R. (1973). The Theory of Rational Option Pricing. Bell Journal of 
Economics and Management Science 4, 141-183. 
Merton, R. (1974). On the Pricing of Corporate Debt: The Risk Structure of 
Interest Rates. Journal Of Finance 29, 449-479. 
Merton, R. (1976). Option Pricing When the Underlying Stock Returns are 
Discontinuous. Journal of Financial Economics 5, 125-144. 
Merton, R. (1990). Continuous Time Finance. Blackwell, Oxford. 
Meyer, P.A. (1976). Un Cours sur les Integrales Stochastiques. Seminaire de 
Probabilites X, Springer Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg New York. 
Miltersen, K., Sandmann, K. & Sondermann, D. (1997). Closed Form Solutions 
for Term Structure Derivatives with Log-normal Interest Rates. Journal of 
Finance 52, 409-430. 
Miyahara, Y. (1997). Canonical Martingale Measures of Incomplete Assets 
Markets. In Watanabe et al. (eds), Proceedings of the Seventh Japan-Russia 
Symposium. World Scientific, Singapore. 
Musiela, M. (1993). Stochastic PDEs and Term Structure Models. Preprint. 
Musiela, M. & Rutkowski, M. (1997). Martingale Methods in Financial Modeling. 
Springer Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg New York. 

REFERENCES 
459 
Myneni, R. (1992). The Pricing of American Options. Annals of Applied 
Probability 2, 1-23. 
Bksendal, B. (1995). Stochastic Differential Equations (4th edn). Springer 
Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg. 
Pelsser, A. (2000). Eficient Methods of Valuing Interest Rate Derivatives. 
Springer Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg. 
Platen, E. (1996). Explaining Interest Rate Dynamics. Preprint. Centre for 
Financial Mathematics, Australian National University, Canberra. 
Platen, E. & Rebolledo, R. (1995). Principles for Modelling Financial Markets. 
Journal of Applied Probability 33, 601-613. 
Protter, Ph. (1990). Stochastic Integration and Differential Equations, Springer 
Verlag, New York. 
Reiner, E. (1992). Quanto Mechanics. RISK, 5. 
Rendleman, R. & Bartter, B. (1979). Two State Option Pricing. Journal of 
Finance 34, 1092-1110. 
Revuz, D. & Yor, M. (1991). Continuous Martingales and Brownian Motion. 
Springer Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg. 
Ritchken, P. & Sankarasubramanian, L. (1995). Volatility Structures of Forward 
Rates and the Dynamics of the Term Structure. Mathematical Finance 5, 
55-72. 
Rogers, L.C.G. (1995). Which Model for Term-Structure of Interest Rates Should 
One Use? Mathematical Finance, IMA Vol. 65. Springer Verlag, New York, 
pp. 93-116. 
Rogers, L.C.G. (1997). The Potential Approach to the Term Structure of Interest 
Rates and Foreign Exchange Rates. Mathematical Finance 7, 157-176. 
Royden, D.L. (1988). Real Analysis. MacMillan, New York. 
Rubinstein, M. & Reiner, E. (1991). Breaking Down the Barriers. RISK 4, 28-35. 
Rudin, W. (1991). finctional Analysis. McGraw-Hill. 
Schachermayer, W. (1994). Martingale Measures for Discrete Time Processes 
with Infinite Horizon. Mathematical Finance 4, 25-56. 
Schachermayer, W. (2002). Optimal Investment in Incomplete Financial Mar- 
kets. In Geman et al. (eds), Mathematical Finance-Bachelier Congress 2000, 
427462. 
Schweizer, M. (2001). A Guided Tour through Quadratic Hedging Approaches. 
In E. Jouini, J. Cvitanic and M. Musiela (eds), Option Pricing, Interest Rates 
and Risk Management. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. 
Schweizer, M. (1988). Hedging of Options in a General Semimartingale Model. 
Dissertation, ETH, Zurich. 
Schweizer, M. (1991). Option Hedging for Semimartingales. Stochastic Processes 
and Their Applications 37, 339-363. 
Shirakawa, H. (1991). Interest Rate Option Pricing with Poisson-Gaussian 
Forward Rate Curve Processes. Mathematical Finance 1, 77-94. 

