# Incomplete Markets, Dividends, Currency & Barrier Options

!!! info "Source"
    **Arbitrage Theory in Continuous Time** by Tomas Björk, Oxford University Press, 2nd ed., 2004.
    These notes are used for educational purposes.

## Incomplete Markets, Dividends, Currency Derivatives & Barriers

EXERCISES 
191 
13.6 Exercises 
Exercise 13.1 Prove Proposition 13.3. 
1 Exercise 13.2 Check all calculations in the derivation of the PDE in 
Proposition 13.4. 
Exercise 13.3 Consider again the exchange option in Example 13.5. Now 
assume that w1 and w2 are no longer independent, but that the local correlation 
is given by dw1 dW2 = pdt. (We still assume that both Wiener processes have 
unit variance parameter, i.e. that dW; = dw; = dt.) HOW will this affect the 
Black-Scholes-type formula given in the example? 
Exercise 13.4 Consider the stock price model in Example 13.5. The T-contract 
X to be priced is defined by 
where a and b are given positive numbers. Thus, up to the scaling factors a and b, 
we obtain the maximum of the two stock prices at time T. Use Proposition 13.4 
and the Black-Scholes formula in order to derive a pricing formula for this 
contract. See Johnson (1987). 
Hint: You may find the following formula (for x > 0) useful. 
Exercise 13.5 Use the ideas in Section 13.4 to analyze the pricing PDE for a 
claim of the form X = cP(S(T)) where we now assume that 
is homogeneous of 
degree p, i.e. 
cP(t.s)=tPcP(s), v t > o .  

MULTIDIMENSIONAL MODELS: MARTINGALE 
APPROACH* 
In this chapter, we will now change our point of view and use the martingale 
machinery of Chapter 10 to analyze a multidimensional model which is more gen- 
eral than the one discussed in the previous chapter. This will give more general 
results than those obtained earlier and it will also provide us with an enhanced 
understanding of the pricing and hedging problems for Wiener driven models. 
In particular we will, for the special case of Wiener driven models, produce a 
self-contained proof of the Second Fundamental Theorem. 
Let us thus consider a filtered probability space ( R , 3 ,  P, T )  carrying a 
k-dimensional standard Wiener process W. The basic setup is as follows. 
Assumption 14.0.1 We assume the following: 
There are n risky asset Sl, . . . , S, given a priori. 
Under the objective probability measure P, the S-dynamics are given by 
fori= 1, ..., n. 
The coeficients processes ai and uij above are assumed to be adapted. 
We have the standard risk free asset with price process B, where 
dB(t) = r(t)B(t) dt. 
(14.2) 
The short rate is allowed to be a stochastic adapted process. 
With notation as above we can write this on compact form as 
where D is the diagonal matrix defined in (13.4). 
Note that at this point we do not assume that we have the same number of 
driving Wiener processes as the number of risky assets. Also note that the prob- 
ability space is allowed to carry also other processes than the Wiener process W, 
and thus that the filtration could be generated by other processes beside W. 
For example, we make no assumptions about the distribution of the short rate 
process r or of the processes ai and uij-we 
only assume that they are adapted. 

ABSENCE OF ARBITRAGE 
193 
1 In particular this allows for models where these processes are path dependent 
upon the Wiener process, or that they are driven by some other "hidden" state 
variable processes. See below for a particular case. 
Remark 14.0.1 In many applications there are, beside S, other nonfinancial 
variables which may influence r, a ,  and IS or the claims under consideration. 
A common situation is when these nonfinancial variables are modeled through 
some (vector) process X with P-dynamics of the form 
Note that we assume that the same P-Wiener process W is driving both S 
and X. This is no serious restriction, since if, e.g. S is driven by w1 and X is 
driven by w2 then we define w as (W1, W2). Note that it is important that 
we assume that the vector process X does not contain any price process. Any 
price component of X should instead be included in S. 
14.1 Absence of Arbitrage 
Our first task is to investigate when our model is free of arbitrage, and to this 
end we use the First Fundamental Theorem 10.22 and look for a martingale 
measure Q with B as the numeraire. Using the Girsanov Theorem 11.16 we 
define a prospective likelihood process L by 
dL(t) = L(t)cp*(t) dW(t), 
(14.5) 
L(0) = 1, 
(14.6) 
where cp is some adapted k-dimensional (column-vector) process, and we recall 
from (11.24) that L is given by the Doleans exponential as 
We now define our candidate martingale measure Q by setting dQ = L(T)dP 
on fi, and from the Girsanov Theorem we know that we can write 
where W is a standard Q-Wiener process. Plugging (14.7) into the P-dynamics 
(14.3) we obtain the following Q-dynamics of S: 
dS(t) = D [S(t)] [a(t) + c(t)cp(t)] dt + D [S(t)] a(t) dW(t). 
(14.8) 
From (10.51) we know that, disregarding integrability problems, Q is a 
martingale measure if and only if the local rate of return of each asset equals the 
short rate, i.e. if and only if the equality 
+ IS(t)v(t) = r(t) 
(14.9) 

194 
MULTIDIMENSIONAL MODELS: MARTINGALE APPROACH 
holds with probability one for each t, where r is defined by 
In this equation, which we write as 
a, a, and r are given a priori and we want to solve for cp. Thus, for each t, and 
P-as., the n-dimensional vector r(t) - a(t) must be in the image of the diffusion 
matrix u(t) so we have the following result. 
Proposition 14.1 A necessary condition for the absence of arbitmge is that 
with probability one for each t. A suficient condition for absence of arbitrage is 
that there exists a process cp which solves (14.10) and such that E (cp * W )  
is a 
martingale. 
Note that it is not enough for cp to solve (14.10). We also need enough integ- 
rability to ensure that L is a true martingale (and not just a local one). Hence 
the following definition. 
Definition 14.2 A Girsanov kernel cp is said to be admissible if it generates 
a martingale measure, i. e. it solves (14.10) and E (cp * W )  is a martingale. 
The integrability problem for L will be discussed further below, as in 
Proposition 14.10. However, the main focus will be on eqn (14.10) and we will 
thus often carry out the arguments "modulo integrability problems". 
Proposition 14.1 is quite general, but it also covers "pathological" models, 
such as those where all assets Sl, . . . , Sn are identical. In order not to be dis- 
tracted by silly models like that we make the following definition which will 
guarantee that the concept of no arbitrage is structurally stable. 
Definition 14.3 The model above is said to be generically arbitrage free i f  
it is arbitrage free for every (suficiently integrable) choice of a. 
We then have the following central result. 
Proposition 14.4 Disregarding integrability problems the model is generically 
arbitmge free i f  and only if7 for each t 5 T and P-a.s., the mapping 
is surjective, i.e. i f  and only i f  the volatility matrix u(t) has rank n. 

COMPLETENESS 
195 
From this result it follows in particular that for absence of arbitrage we must 
in the generic case necessarily have n 5 k, i.e. we must have at least as many 
independent Wiener processes as we have risky assets. This is quite in accordance 
with the informal reasoning in the meta-theorem 8.3.1. 
We note that the martingale measure equation (14.10) only involves the 
S-dynamics, and not the dynamics of the extra factor process X (if the model 
includes such a factor). This is of course because the no arbitrage restrictions 
only concern prices of traded assets. 
If our (or the market's) choice of Q is generated by the Girsanov kernel cp, then 
the Q-dynamics of X are of course determined by this Girsanov transformation, 
so we have complete control of the distribution of X under Q. We summarize 
this as a separate result. 
Proposition 14.5 Assuming absence of arbitrage, consider a jhed martingale 
measure Q generated by cp, and denote the corresponding Q- Wiener process by W. 
1 
Then the following hold: 
The Q-dynamics of S are 
dS(t) = r(t)D [S(t)] dt + D [S(t)] u(t) dW(t). 
(14.12) 
- 
If the model contains an extra factor process X with P-dynamics given by 
(14.4), then the Q-dynamics of X are given by 
dX(t) = {PX (t) + ax (t)cp(t)} dt + ux (t) dW(t) 
(14.13) 
14.2 Completeness 
We now go on to obtain conditions for the model to be complete, and in order 
to avoid pathological cases we assume that the model is generically arbitrage 
free. From the Second Fundamental Theorem 10.24, we know that the model is 
complete if and only if the martingale measure is unique, so it is tempting to 
draw the conclusion that we have completeness if and only if eqn (14.10) has a 
unique solution, i.e. if and only if the condition 
Ker[n(t)] = (01, 
(14.14) 
is satisfied for all t and with probability one. This is, however, not quite true 
and the reason is that, in case of a general filtered probability space, there is 
no guarantee that all equivalent measure transformations are of the Girsanov 
type above. In a general situation, where there are other sources of randomness 
beside the Wiener process W, like say an independent Poisson process N, the 
Girsanov transformation above will only change the measure for the Wiener 
process, but it will not affect the Poisson process. Thus; even if eqn (14.10) has 
a unique solution we do not have a unique martingale measure, since we have no 
restriction on how we are allowed to change the measure for the Poisson process. 

196 
MULTIDIMENSIONAL MODELS: MARTINGALE APPROACH 
Put into more economic terms it is fairly obvious that if we consider a claim X 
of the type X = @(N(T)), then it is impossible to hedge this claim if the asset 
prices are driven by the Wiener process alone. 
In order to obtain sharp results we are therefore forced to make the assump 
tion that all randomness in our model is generated by the Wiener process W. 
We then have the following basic result. 
Proposition 14.6 Assume that the model is generically arbitrage free and that 
the filtration 3_ is defined by 
3 t  = FY. 
(14.15) 
Then, disregarding integrability problems, the model is complete if and only if 
k = n and the volatility matrix a(t) is invertible P-a.s. for each t 5 T. 
Proof Fkom the Converse of the Girsanov Theorem 11.6, we know that under 
the assumption that the filtration is the one generated by the Wiener process, 
every equivalent measure transformation is obtained by a Girsanov transforma- 
tion of the type above. Hence the martingale measure is unique if and only if the 
solution of the "martingale measure equation" (14.10) is unique, and this occurs 
if and only if u(t) is injective, which implies k 5 n. Since we have assumed gen- 
eric absence of arbitrage, we know that n 2 k and that a(t) is surjective. Thus 
k = n and a(t) is invertible. 
14.3 Hedging 
In this section we will discuss the completeness question from the more concrete 
perspective of actually producing hedging strategies for an arbitrary T-claim X. 
This has independent interest and it will also provide us with a new proof 
(within the framework of the present chapter) for the Second Fundamental 
Theorem. The advantage of this alternative proof is that it is much more concrete 
than the rather abstract one given in Section 10.4. The drawback is that we only 
provide the proof for Wiener driven models, whereas the Second Fundamental 
Theorem in fact holds in much more general situations. 
Let us thus again consider the model from (14.3) 
Assumption 14.3.1 We assume that the model is generically free of arbitrage, 
i. e. that 
Im [a(t)] = Rn, 
(14.17) 
for all t and with probability one. We also assume that the model is purely Wiener 
driven, i.e. that Ft = 3tw. 
Since we have assumed absence of arbitrage there exists some (not necessarily 
unique) martingale measure and we choose a particular one, denote it by Q and 
keep it fixed for the rest of the argument. 

HEDGING 
197 
We then choose an arbitrary T-claim X in L1 (Q), and the problem is to find 
a hedging portfolio for X. From Lemma 10.15 we know that X can be hedged if 
and only if the martingale M, defined by 
admits dynamics of the form 
where as usual Z = SIB, and where h is an adapted (row vector) process 
in Rn. Given our assumption of a purely Wiener driven system it follows from 
the Martingale Representation Theorem 11.2 that there exists an adapted 
k-dimensional (row vector) process g such that 
On the other hand, since the Z process is a (local) martingale under Q, it follows 
easily from It6 that the Q-dynamics are given by 
Plugging (14.21) into (14.19) gives us 
Comparing (14.22) with (14.20) we see that we can hedge X if and only if we 
can solve (at each t and for every w )  the equation 
or, alternatively the equation 
a* (t) D [Z(t)] h* (t) = g* (t) . 
(14.23) 
In this equation, g is generated by the claim X and we want to solve the equation 
for h. Since D [Z(t)] is nondegenerate diagonal, the equation can be solved if and 
only if 
g*(t) E Im [a*(t)] 
and we have the following result. 
Proposition 14.7 Under Assumption 14.3.1 the model is complete if and only if 
Im [a* (t)] = R ~ .  
(14.24) 

198 
MULTIDIMENSIONAL MODELS: MARTINGALE APPROACH 
If the model is complete then, using the notation of Chapter 10, the replicating 
portfolio [ho, hs] is given by 
Proof Follows immediately from Lemma 10.15. 
Note that D-' [Z(t)] is just a diagonal matrix with Z;l(t), . . . , Z;l(t) 
on 
the diagonal. 
We can now easily provide an alternative proof of a restricted version of the 
Second Fundamental Theorem. 
Theorem 14.8 (The Second Fundamental Theorem) Under Assumption 
14.3.1 the model is complete if and only if the martingale measure is unique. 
Proof Using Proposition 14.7 and the standard duality result 
{Im [a* (t)]}' = Ker [~(t)] 
we see that the model is complete if and only if 
Ker [a(t)] = (0) . 
This is, however, precisely the condition for the uniqueness of the martingale 
measure obtained earlier. 
It is instructive to compare these duality arguments with those given in the 
simple setting of Chapter 3, and in particular to the proof of Theorem 3.10, 
to see how much of the structure is carried over from the simple one period 
model to the present general setting. From the discussion above we see that the 
"martingale measure equation" (14.10) and the "hedging equation" (14.23) are 
adjoint equations. Thus absence of arbitrage and completeness are truly dual 
concepts from a functional analytical point of view. 
14.4 Pricing 
Assuming absence of arbitrage, the general pricing formula is, as always, given 
by the risk neutral valuation formula 
where Q is some choice of martingale measure, where the Q-dynamics of S are 
given by 
dS(t) = D [S(t)] r(t) dt + D [S(t)] a(t) dwQ (t), 
(14.29) 
and where WQ is Q-Wiener. 

MARKOVIAN MODELS AND PDEs 
199 
14.5 Markovian Models and PDEs 
We now apply the martingale approach to the Markovian model discussed in 
the previous chapter. Thus we again introduce Assumption 13.1.1, i.e. we assume 
that k = n, that the vector of returns a as well as the volatility matrix a are 
deterministic and constant over time, that a is invertible and that the filtration 
is the one generated by the Wiener process. Thus S will be a Markov process. 
The general pricing formula is, as always, 
n(t; X) = e-r(T-t)~Q [XI Ft] , 
(14.30) 
where the Q-dynamics of S are given by 
If we now assume that X is a simple claim, i.e. of form X = 
(S(T)), then, 
since S is Markovian we have 
and thus (exactly why?) the pricing process must be of the form n(t; X) = 
F(t, S(t)) for some pricing function F. We can then apply the Kolmogorov back- 
ward equation to the expectation above and we immediately see that the pricing 
function must solve the PDE 
F (T, s) = @(s). 
(14.31) 
We have thus recovered our old pricing result from Theorem 13.1. 
Turning to hedging, we know from the uniqueness of the martingale measure 
that the market is complete, and thus that there exists a hedging portfolio h = 
(ho, hl, . . . , hn). The value process dynamics are of course given by 
but we also have V(t; h) = F(t, S(t)) where F solves the PDE above. Applying 
the It6 formula, this gives us 
n 
dV(t; h) = C Fi (t, S(t)) dS, (t) + (second-order terms) dt. 

200 
MULTIDIMENSIONAL MODELS: MARTINGALE APPROACH 
Comparing these two equations we can identify hl, . . . , h, from the dSi terms 
and we see that the hedging portfolio is given by 
aF 
hj(t)=-(t,S(t)), 
i = l ,  ..., n, 
asi 
If we express the portfolio in terms of relative weights, this will once again give 
us the hedge of Theorem 13.7. 
14.6 Market Prices of Risk 
Going back to the general model of Section 14.1 let us assume that the model 
is generically free of arbitrage possibilities, then we know that the "martingale 
measure equation" 
u(t)cp(t) = r(t) - 4 t ) ,  
always possesses a (not necessarily unique) solution cp = (cpl,. . . , cpk)*, where 
cp is the Girsanov kernel used in the transition from P to Q. If we now define 
the vector process X by X = -9, then we can write (14.34) as 
a(t) - r(t) = a(t)X(t), 
and on component form this becomes 
k 
ai(t)-r(t)=Ca,j(t)Xj(t), i = l ,  ..., n. 
i=l 
As in the simpler setting of Section 13.2 we have an economic interpretation 
of this equation. On the left-hand side we have the excess rate of return over 
the risk free rate for asset No. i, and on the right-hand side we have a linear 
combination of the volatilities o,j of asset No. i with respect to the individual 
Wiener processes WI, . . . , ~
k
.
 
Thus Xj is the "factor loading" for the individual 
risk factor Wj, and this object is often referred to as the "market price of risk 
for risk factor No. j". Roughly speaking one can then say that Xj gives us a 
measure of the aggregate risk aversion in the market towards risk factor No. j. 
The main point to notice here is that the same X is used for all assets. We can 
summarize the situation as follows: 
Under absence of arbitrage there will exist a market price of risk vector 
process X satisfying (14.35). 
The market price of risk X is related to the Girsanov kernel cp through 
cp(t) = -X(t). 

THE HANSEN-JAGANNATHAN BOUNDS 
201 
a In a complete market the market price of risk, or alternatively the 
martingale measure Q, is uniquely determined and there is thus a unique 
price for every derivative. 
1. a In an incomplete market there are several possible market prices of risk pro- 
cesses and several possible martingale measures, all of which are consistent 
with no arbitrage. 
a In an incomplete market, cp, A, and Q are thus not determined by absence 
' 
of arbitrage alone. Instead they will be determined by supply and demand 
kk on the actual market, i.e. by the agents on the market. 
14.7 Stochastic Discount Factors 
Consider again the model in Section 14.1, assume absence of arbitrage, and 
choose a fixed martingale measure Q with corresponding Girsanov kernel cp. In 
Section 10.6 we defined the stochastic discount factor A by 
A(t) = e- So' '('1 d s ~ ( t ) ,  
where L is the likelihood process for the measure transformation from P to Q. 
In the special case of a Wiener driven model we can compute L explicitly as 
~ ( t )  
= E (cp * W) 
(t) = 
P* (3) dW(s1- 4 li 11~(8) 
112 ds 
so in this model we have an explicit expression for A as 
~ ( t )  
= 
''(8) 
dW(3)- 4 .fo'{II~(s)ll~+~(~)) 
d8 
(14.37) 
we can of course also express A in terms of the market price of risk process as 
~ ( t )  
= e- S. A*(s) dW(s)-i S~{ll~(~)llZ++(~)) 
ds. 
(14.38) 
14.8 The Hansen-Jagannathan Bounds 
Assume that we have generic absence of arbitrage, i.e. that a(t) is surjective, so 
the martingale measure equation 
u ( t ) ~ ( t )  = r(t) - 4th 
(14.39) 
always possesses a solution. As noted above, this is not enough to ensure absence 
of arbitrage, since we must also have a guarantee that there exists an admissible 
solution cp, i.e. a cp such that the induced likelihood process L = E(cp * W) is 

202 
MULTIDIMENSIONAL MODELS: MARTINGALE APPROACH 
a true martingale (and not just a local one). Recalling, from Lemma 11.5, the 
Novikov condition 
it is then natural to look for a solution cp to (14.39) with minimal Euclidian norm 
at every t. 
We recall the following result from elementary linear algebra. 
Proposition 14.9 Assume that the n x k matrix A is surjective as a mapping 
A : R~ -+ Rn. For any y E Rn, consider the optimization problem 
Then the following hold: 
'I 
A* is injective and A*A is invertible. 
The unique optimal solution of the minimum norm problem is given by 
2 = (A*A)-~ 
A * ~ .  
(14.40) 
Proof Left to the reader as an exercise. 
From this we have the following obvious result. 
Proposition 14.10 Assume that the volatility matrix o(t) is surjective P-a.s. 
for all t. Then the process @ defined by 
1 
@ =  [u*u]- u*[r-a], 
(14.41) 
has the property that, 
Il@(t)ll 5 Il~(t)ll 
(14.42) 
for all t 
Novikov 
and for every cp which satisfies (14.39). If in 
condition, then the model is free of arbitrage. 
rlar 8 s atisfies 
We may of course use the correspondence X = -cp between the Girsanov kernel cp 
1 
and the market price of risk X to formulate a parallel result for market prices of 
risk. we define the minimal market price of risk process as 
i 
= [u*u]-'a* [a - r], 
(14.43) 
and we have the inequality 
Ili.(t>ll s IlX(t)ll 
I 
for all admissible A. 
. 
, 

THE HANSEN-JAGANNATHAN BOUNDS 
203 
These simple facts are more or less the essence of what in discrete time 
asset pricing is known as the "Hansen-Jagannathan bounds" (see the Notes). 
To obtain these bounds we consider the price process ~ ( t )  
of any asset in the 
model (underlying or derivative), write its P-dynamics on the form 
d.lr(t) = .lr(t)a,(t) dt + .lr(t)u, (t) d ~ ( t )  
and define its Sharpe Ratio process by the expression 
%(t> - r(t) 
Ilflr(t)ll 
' 
Denoting the P-variance by varP we have the informal interpretation 
llu,(t)1I2 dt = varP [d~(t)/.lr(t)l 
Ftl 
so the Sharpe Ratio gives us the conditional mean excess rate of return per unit 
of total volatility. 
We now have the following simple but interesting result. 
Proposition 14.11 (The Hansen-Jagannathan Bounds) Assume generic 
absence of arbitrage and define j\ by (14.43). Then the following holds for all 
assets, underlying or derivative, and for all admissible market prices of risk A. 
1 a r l ~ ~ , ~ ~ ~ )  
1 5 !li(t)ll 5 llA(t)ll- 
(14.44) 
Proof The second inequality is already proved so we only have to prove the 
first. Fix any A generating a martingale measure. We then have 
o,(t)A(t> = a,(t> - r(t), 
am(t) - r(t) =- or(t) A(t), 
llun(t)ll 
Ilur(t)ll 
1 and from the Cauchy-Schwartz inequality in finite dimensional space we obtain 
- r(t) 1 5 1
1
~
1
1
 
- llA(t)ll = llA(t)ll. 
Il%(t) II 
0% (t) II 
Since this holds for every A, it holds in particular for i. 
We can now connect this result to the stochastic discount factor A by noting 
that, for our model class, the.dynamics of A are given by 
dA(t) = -~(t)A(t) dt + A(t)cp*(t) d ~ ( t ) ,  
(14.45) 

204 
MULTIDIMENSIONAL MODELS: MAWINGALE APPROACH 
or alternatively 
A (and cp) also has the interpretation as the volatility vector of the stochastic 
discount factor. The point of this from an economic perspective is that we can 
either view the Hansen-Jagannathan bounds as a lower bound for the stochastic 
discount factor volatility for a given (observed) Sharpe ratio, or as an upper 
bound on the Sharpe ratio for a given (observed) stochastic discount factor 
volatility. 
14.9 Exercises 
Exercise 14.1 Derive (14.46). 
Exercise 14.2 Assume generic absence of arbitrage and prove that any market 
price of risk process X generating a martingale measure must be of the form 
where p(t) is orthogonal to the rows of u(t) for all t. 
14.10 Notes 
The results in this chapter are fairly standard. The Hansen-Jagannathan bounds 
were first derived (in discrete time) in Hansen and Jagannathan (1991). They 
have since then become the subject of a large literature. See the recent text- 
book Cochrane (2001) for an exposition of (mostly discrete time) asset pricing, 
including a detailed discussion of the discrete time HJ bounds, connections to 
the "equity premium puzzle" and an extensive bibliography on the subject. 

i 
8 
15 
INCOMPLETE MARKETS 
15.1 Introduction 
In this chapter we will investigate some aspects of derivative pricing in incomplete 
markets. We know from the mehtheorem that markets generically are incom- 
plete when there are more random sources than there are traded.assets, and 
this can occur in an infinite number of ways, so there is no "canonical" way 
of writing down a model of an incomplete market. We will confine ourselves to 
study a particular type of incomplete market, namely a "factor model", i.e. a 
market where there are some nontraded underlying objects. Before we go on to 
the formal description of the models let us briefly recall what we may expect in 
an incomplete model. 
Since, by assumption, the market is incomplete we will not be able to hedge 
a generic contingent claim. 
In particular there will not be a unique price for a generic derivative. 
15.2 A Scalar Nonpriced Underlying Asset 
We will start by studying the simplest possible incomplete market, namely a 
market where the only randomness comes from a scalar stochastic process which 
is not the price of a traded asset. We will then discuss the problems which arise 
when we want to price derivatives which are written in terms of the underlying 
object. The model is as follows. 
Assumption 15.2.1 The only objects which are a priori given are the 
, 
An empirically observable stochastic process X ,  which is not assumed to 
be the price process of a traded asset, with P-dynamics given by 
d X ( t )  = ,u (t, X ( t ) )  dt + (T (t, X ( t ) )  d~ (t). 
(15.1) 
Here W is a standard scalar P- Wiener process. 
A risk free asset (money account) with the dynamics 
dB(t) = r B ( t )  dt, 
(15.2) 
I 
where r as usual is the deterministic short rate of interest. 
We now consider a given contingent claim, written in terms of the process X .  
More specifically we define the T-claim y by 

206 
INCOMPLETE MARKETS 
where @ is some given deterministic function, and our main problem is that of 
studying the price process II(t; y )  for this claim. 
In order to give some substance to the discussion, and to understand the 
difference between the present setting and that of the previous chapters, let us 
consider a specific concrete, interpretation of the model. We may, for example, 
interpret the process X as the temperature at some specific point on the earth, 
say the end of the Palace Pier in Brighton. Thus X(t) is the temperature (in 
centigrade) at time t at the Palace Pier. Suppose now that you want to go to 
Brighton for a holiday, but that you fear that it will be unpleasantly cold at 
the particular time T when you visit Brighton. Then it may be wise to buy 
"holiday insurance", i.e. a contract which pays you a certain amount of money 
if the weather is unpleasant at a grespecified time in a prespecified place. If the 
monetary unit is the pound sterling, the contract function @ above may have 
the form 
In other words, if the temperature at time T is below 20°C (degrees centigrade) 
you will obtain 100 pounds from the insurance company, whereas you will get 
nothing if the temperature exceeds 20°C. 
The problem is now that of finding a "reasonable" price for the contract 
above, and as usual we interpret the word "reasonable" in the sense that there 
should be no arbitrage possibilities if we are allowed to trade the contract. This 
last sentence contains a hidden assumption which we now formalize. 
Assumption 15.2.2 There is a liquid market for every contingent claim. 
If we compare this model with the standard Black-Scholes model, we see many 
similarities. In both cases we have the money acco&t B, and in both cases 
we have an a priori given underlying process. For the Black-Scholes model the 
underlying process is the stock price S, whereas we now have the underlying 
process X ,  and in both models the claim to be priced is a deterministic function 
of the underlying process, evaluated at time T. 
In view of these similarities it is now natural to assume that the results from 
the Black-Scholes analysis will carry over to the present case, i.e. we are (per- 
haps) led to believe that the price process for the claim y is uniquely determined 
by the P-dynamics of the underlying process X. It is, however, very important 
to understand that this is, most emphatically, not the case, and the reasons are 
as follows: 
1. If we consider the a priori given market, which only consists of the money 
account B, we see that the number R of random sources in this case 
equals one (one driving Wiener process), while the number M of traded 
assets (always excluding the money account B) equals zero. F'rom the 
meta-theorem it now follows that the market is incomplete. The incom- 
pleteness can also be seen from the obvious fact that in the a priori given 

A SCALAR NONPRTCED UNDERLYING ASSET 
207 
here are no interesting ways of forming self-financing portfolios. 
- 
The only strategy that is allowed is to invest all our money in the bank, 
and then we can only sit down and passively watch our money grow at 
a 
the rate r. In particular we have no possibility to replicate any interesting 
L 
derivative of the form @ (X(T)). We thus conclude that, since we cannot 
replicate our claim, we cannot expect to obtain a unique arbitrage free 
price process. 
'' 2. One natural swategy to follow in order to obtain a unique price for 
' 
the claim X is of course to imitate the scheme for the Black-Scholes 
model. We would assume that the price process II(t;y) is of the form 
n(t; y )  = F(t, X(t)), and then we would form a portfolio based on the 
derivative F and the underlying X. Choosing the portfolio weights such 
that the portfolio has no driving Wiener process would give us a riskless 
asset, the rate of return on which would have to equal the short rate r ,  
and this last equality would finally have the form of a PDE for the pricing 
function F. This approach is, however, completely nonsensical, since in 
the present setting the process X is (by assumption) not the price of a 
traded asset, and thus it is meaningless to talk about a "portfolio based 
?:' 
on X". In our concrete interpretation this is eminently clear. Obviously 
" 
you can buy any number of insurance contracts and put them in your 
." 
portfolio, but it is also obvious that you cannot meaningfully add, e.g. 
15OC to that portfolio. 
We can summarize the situation as follows: 
The price of a particular derivative will not, be completely determined by 
the specification (15.1) of the X-dynamics and the requirement that the 
market [B(t), 
II(t; y)] is free of arbitrage. 
The reason for this fact is that arbitrage pricing is always a case of pricing 
a derivative in terms of the price of some underlying assets. In our market 
we do not have sufficiently many underlying assets. 
Thus we will not obtain a unique price of a particular derivative. This fact 
does not mean, however, that prices of various derivatives can take any form 
whatsoever. From the discussion above we see that the reason for the incom- 
pleteness is that we do not have enough underlying assets, so if we adjoin 
one more asset to the market, without introducing any new Wiener processes, 
then we expect the market to be complete. This idea can be expressed in the 
Idea 15.2.1 
We cannot say anything about the price of any particular derivative. 
The requirement of an arbitrage free derivative market implies that prices 
of different derivatives (i.e. claims with different contract functions 
or different times of expiration) will have to satisfy certain internal 
consistency relations in order to avoid arbitrage possibilities on the 

208 
INCOMPLETE MARKETS 
bond market. In terms of our concrete interpretation this means that even 
if we are unable to produce a unique price for a fixed weather insurance 
contract, say the "20°C contract" 
for the fixed date T, there must be internal consistency requirements 
between the price of this contract and the price of the following "25OC 
contract" 
with some expiration date T' (where of course we may have T = T'). 
In particular, if we take the price of one particular "benchmark" derivative 
as a priori given, then the prices of all other derivatives will be uniquely 
determined by the price of the benchmark. This fact is in complete agree 
ment with the meta-theorem, since in an a priori given market consisting of 
one benchmark derivative plus the risk free asset we will have R = M = 1, 
thus guaranteeing completeness. In our concrete interpretation we expect 
that the prices of all insurance contracts should be determined by the price 
of any fmed benchmark contract. If, for example, we choose the 20°C con- 
tract above as our benchmark, and take its price as given, then we expect 
the 25°C contract to be priced uniquely in terms of the benchmark price. 
To put these ideas into action we now take as given two fixed T-claims, y 
and 2, of the form 
where @ and I' are given deterministic real valued functions. The project is to find 
out how the prices of these two derivatives must be related to each other in order 
to avoid arbitrage possibilities on the derivative market. As above we assume that 
the contracts are traded on a frictionless market, and ad in the Black-Scholes 
analysis we make an assumption about the structure of the price processes. 
Assumption 15.2.3 W e  assume that 
there is a liquid, frictionless market for each of the contingent claims y 
and 2. 
the market prices of the claims are of the form 
where F and G are smooth real valued functions. 

A SCALAR NONPRICED UNDERLYING ASSET 
209 
We now proceed exactly as in the Black-Scholes case. We form a portfolio 
based on F and G, and choose the weights so as to make the portfolio locally 
riskless. The rate of return of this riskless portfolio has to equal the short rate 
of interest, and this relation will give us some kind of equation, which we then 
have to analyze in detail. 
From the assumption above, the It8 formula, and the X-dynamics we obtain 
the following price dynamics for the price processes F(t, X(t)) and G(t, X(t)). 
d F  = aFFdt + U F F ~ W ,  
(15.4) 
dG = aGGdt +uGGdw. 
(15.5) 
Here the processes aF and UF are given by 
Ft + pFx + $a2 Fxx 
a~ = 
F 
, 
UFX 
UF = - 
F '  
and correspondingly for a~ and UG. As usual we have suppressed most 
arguments, so in more detail we have, e.g. 
d F  
P F X  = ~ ( t .  
X(t))az(t, X(t)). 
We now form a self-financing portfolio based on F and G, with portfolio 
weights denoted by UF and UG, respectively. According to (6.13), the portfolio 
dynamics are given by 
d F  
d V = V  UP.-+uG.- 
{ 
F 
dGG) , 
and using the expressions above we get 
~ v = v { u ~ ~ c ~ F + u ~ ~ c ~ ~ ) ~ ~ + v { u ~ ~ u ~ + u ~
(15.6) 
In order to make this portfolio locally riskless we must choose UF and UG such 
that UF - OF + UG . UG = 0, and we must also remember that they must add 
to unity. Thus we define UF and UG as the solution to the following system of 
i 
U F + U G = ~ ,  
U ~ . U F + U G - U G  
=0. 
The solution to this system is given by 
-uG 
UF = - uGi 
I 
{ = 
uF 
uF - uG' 
I 

A SCALAR NONPRICED UNDERLYING ASSET 
209 
1 
We now proceed exactly as in the Black-Scholes case. We form a portfolio 
/ based on F and G, and choose the weights so as to make the portfolio locally 
C riskless. The rate of return of this riskless portfolio has to equal the short rate 
[ of interest, and this relation will give us some kind of equation, which we then 
' have to analyze in detail. 
From the assumption above, the It6 formula, and the X-dynamics we obtain 
the following price dynamics for the price processes F(t, X(t)) and G(t, X(t)). 
Here the processes aF and UF are given by 
and correspondingly for a G  and UG. As usual we have suppressed most 
arguments, so in more detail we have, e.g. 
We now form a self-financing portfolio based on F and G, with portfolio 
weights denoted by UF and UG, respectively. According to (6.13), the portfolio 
dynamics are given by 
I and using the expressions above we get 
I in order to make this portfolio locally riskless we must choose UF and UG such 
that UF . UF + UG - UG = 0, and we must also remember that they must add 
to unity. Thus we define UF and UG as the solution to the following system of 
equations. 
I 
U F + U G = ~ ,  
( u F . u F + u ~ . c T ~ = o .  
1 
The solution to this system is given by 

210 
INCOMPLETE MARKETS 
and inserting this into the portfolio dynamics equation (15.6) g' lves us 
(YG 
- ( Y F  
' U G  
d V = V .  
UF - UG 
} dt. 
We have thus created a locally riskless asset, so using Proposition 7.6, absence 
of arbitrage must imply the equation 
After some reshding we can rewrite this equation as 
The important fact to notice about this equation is that the left-hand side does 
not depend on the choice of G, while the right-hand side does not depend upon 
the choice of F. The common quotient will thus depend neither on the choice 
of F nor on the choice of G, and we have proved the following central result. 
Proposition 15.1 Assume that the market for derivatives is free of arbitrage. 
Then there exists a universal process X(t) such that, with probability 1, and for 
all t, we have 
regardless of the specific choice of the derivative F .  
There is a natural economic interpretation of this result, and of the process A. 
In eqn (15.7) the numerator is given by (YF - r, and from (15.4) we recognize 
(YF as the local mean rate of return on the derivative F. The numerator (YF - r 
is thus the local mean excess return on the derivative F over the riskless rate of 
return r, i.e. the risk premium of F. In the denominator we find the volatility UF 
of the F process, so we see that X has the dimension "risk premium per unit of 
volatility". This is a concept well known from CAPM theory, so X is commonly 
called "the market price of risk". Proposition 15.1 can now be formulated in the 
following, slightly more flashy, form: 
In a no arbitrage market all derivatives will, regardless of the specific choice 
of contract function, have the same market price of risk. 
We can obtain more explicit information from eqn (15.7) by substituting our 
earlier formulas for (YF and OF into it. After some algebraic manipulations we 
then end up with the following PDE. 
Ft + { p  - Xu) F, + ~ u ~ F , ,  
- TF = 0. 

A SCALAR NONPRICED UNDERLYING ASSET 
211 
This is really shorthand notation for an equation which must hold with probab- 
ility 1, for each t, when all terms are evaluated at the point (t, X(t)). Assuming 
for the moment that the support of X is the entire real line, we can then draw 
the conclusion that the equation must also hold identically when we evaluate it 
at an arbitrary deterministic point (t, x). Furthermore it is clear that we must 
have the boundary condition 
F(T,x) = @(x), Vx E R, 
so we finally end up with the following result. 
Proposition 15.2 (Pricing equation) Assuming absence of arbitrage, the 
pricing function F(t, x) of the T-claim Q(X(T)) solves the following boundary 
F t ( t , x ) + d F ( t , x ) - r F ( t , x ) = O ,  (t,x)c(O,T)xR, 
(15.8) 
F(T,x) = @(x), x E R, 
(15.9) 
At first glance this result may seem to contradict the moral presented above. 
We have stressed earlier the fact that, because of the incompleteness of the 
market, there will be no unique arbitrage free price for a particular derivative. 
In Proposition 15.2, on the other hand, we seem to have arrived at a PDE 
which, when solved, will give us precisely the unique pricing function for any 
simple claim. The solution to this conundrum is that the pricing equation above 
is indeed very nice, but in order to solve it we have to know the short rate of 
interest r, as well as the functions p(t, x), u(t, x), @(x), and A(t, x). Of these, 
only r, p(t, x), a(t, x), and cP(x) are specified exogenously. The market price of 
risk A, on the contrary, is not specified within the model. We can now make 
Idea 15.2.1 above more precise. 
Firstly we see that, even though we cannot determine a unique price for a 
particular derivative, prices of different derivatives must satisfy internal consist- 
ency requirements. This requirement is formulated precisely in Proposition 15.1, 
which says that all derivatives must have the same market price of risk. Thus, if 
we consider two different derivative assets with price processes F and G, these 
may have completely different local mean rates of return (ap and ac), 
and they 
may also have completely diierent volatilities (UF and UG). The consistency rela- 
tion which has to be satisfied in order to avoid arbitrage between the derivatives 
is that, at all times, the quotient 
a
~
-
T
 
OF 

212 
INCOMPLETE MARKETS 
must equal 
Secondly, let us assume that we take the price process of one particular 
derivative as given. To be concrete let us fix the "benchmark" claim I'(X(T)) 
above and assume that the pricing function G(t, x), for l?(X(T)), is specified 
exogenously. Then we can compute the market price of risk by the formula 
Let us then consider an arbitrary pricing function, say the function F for the 
claim @(X(T)). Since the market price of risk is the same for all derivatives we 
may now take the expression for X obtained from (15.10) and insert this into 
the pricing equation (15.8)-(15.9) for the function F. Now everything in this 
equation is well specified, so we can (in principle) solve it, in order to obtain F. 
Thus we see that the price F of an arbitrary claim is indeed uniquely determined 
by the price G of any exogenously specified benchmark claim. 
We can obtain more information from the pricing equation by applying the 
Feynman-KaE representation. The result can be read off immediately and is as 
follows. 
Proposition 15.3 (Risk neutral valuation) Assuming absence of arbitrage, 
the pricing function F(t, x) of the T-claim (P(X(T)) is given by the formula 
where the dynamics of X under the martingale measure Q are given by 
Hem W is a Q- Wiener process, and the subscripts t,x indicate as usual that 
X(t) = x. 
Again we have an "explicit" risk neutral valuation formula for the pricing func- 
tion. The arbitrage free price of the claim is given as the discounted value of the 
mathematical expectation of the future claim. As before the expectation is, how- 
ever, not to be taken under the objective measure P, but under the martingale 
("risk adjusted") measure Q. Note that there is a one-to-one correspondence 
between the martingale measure and the market price of risk. Thus, choosing a 
particular X is equivalent to choosing a particular Q. The characterization of Q 
is just the same as in Proposition 13.3. The proof is left to the reader. 

A SCALAR NONPRICED UNDERLYING ASSET 
213 
Proposition 15.4 The martingale measure Q is characterized by any of the 
following equivalent facts: 
The 2ocal mean rate of return of any derivative price process II(t) equals the 
short rate of interest, i.e. the II(t)-dynamics have the following structural 
form under Q 
dII(t) = rII(t) dt + un(t)II(t)dW(t), 
where W is a Q- Wiener process, and an is the same under Q as under P. 
With II as above, the process II(t)/B(t) is a Q-martingale, i.e. it has a 
zero drift term. 
As for the pricing equation above, we have to know X in order to compute 
the expected value in the risk neutral valuation formula. Thus, in the present 
context, and in contrast to the Black-Scholes case, the martingale measure Q is 
not (generically) determined within the model. 
It is instructive to see how the standard Black-Scholes model can be inter- 
preted within the present model. Let us therefore assume, in contrast to our 
earlier assumptions, that X is in fact the price of a stock in a BlajckScholes 
model. This of course means that the P-dynamics of X are given by 
for some constants a and u. Thus, in terms of the notation in (15.1), p(t, x) = 
x a and u(t, x) = X.U. Our project is still that of finding the arbitrage free price 
for the claim @(X(T)), and to this end we follow the arguments given above, 
which of course are still valid, and try to find a suitable benchmark claim I?. In 
the present setting we can make a particularly clever choice of l?(X(T)), and in 
fact we define the claim by 
I 
This is the claim which at time T gives us exactly one share of the underlying 
stock, and the point is that the price process G(t, X(t)) for this claim is particu- 
1 
larly simple. We have in fact G(t, X(t)) = X(t), the reason being that the claim 
can be trivially replicated using a buy-and-hold strategy which consists of one 
unit of the stock itself. Note that for this argument to hold we use critically our 
new assumption that X really is the price of a traded asset. Using the identity 
dG = dX we now trivially obtain the G-dynamics as 
dG = a ~ d t  
+ U X ~ W .  
Thus, in terms of our earlier discussion we have aG(t, x) = a and uc(t, x) = a. 
We can now determine the market price of risk as 
' 
l 
and the point to note is that, because of our tradability assumption, X is now 
determined within the model. We now go on to the pricing PDE, into which we 

INCOMPLETE MARKETS 
substitute A given as above. The critical part, AF, of the PDE now becomes 
AF(t, 2) = { ~ ( t ,  
2) - X(t, x)a(t, x)) Fx(t, x) + 
z)F,,(t, z) 
={ax-T. 
ax F, + ~ x 2 u 2 ~ , ,  
a - r  
1 
1 2 2  
= rxF, + 5x u F,,, 
so we end up (as expected) with the Black-Scholes equation 
i 
Ft + rxF, + $x2u2~,, - rF = 0, 
F(T, 2) = @(XI, 
and in the risk neutral valuation formula we will get the old Black-Scholes 
dX =rXdt+uXdW. 
15.3 The Multidimensional Case 
We will now go on to study pricing in a model with more than one nonpriced 
underlying asset. The model is as follows. 
Assumption 15.3.1 The only objects which are a priori given are the 
An empirically obsemrable k-dimensional stochastic process 
which is not assumed to be the price process of a traded asset, with 
P-dynamics given by 
I 
dXi(t) = pi (t,X(t)) dt + 6i (t, X(t)) dW(t), i = 1 . .  , k, 
(15.12) 
where w = (Wl, . . . , Wn)* is a standard n-dimensional P- Wiener process. 
A risk free asset (money account) with the dynamics 
dB(t) = rB(t) dt. 
(15.13) 
I 
The object is to find an arbitrage free price process for a T-claim y of the form 
Drawing on our experiences from the previous two sections we expect the 
following: 
We cannot say anything precise about the price process of any particular 
contingent claim. 
Different claims will, however, have to satisfy certain internal consistency 
requirements in order to avoid arbitrage on the derivative market. 

THE MULTIDIMENSIONAL CASE 
215 
I 
More precisely, since we now have n sources of randomness we can (gen- 
i erically) specify the price processes of n different "benchmark" claims. 
F; 
The price processes of all other claims will then be uniquely determined 
by the prices of the benchmarks. 
As usual we assume that there is a liquid market for all contingent claims, 
and in order to use the ideas above we fix exactly n claims yl, . . . , y, of the form 
yi=ai(t,X(T)), i=1, ..., n. 
We furthermore assume that the price processes, [111 (t), . . . , Iln(t)], for these 
claims exist, and that they are of the form 
lli(t) = Fi(t, ~ ( t ) ) ,  i = 1, . . . , n. 
Remark 15.3.1 Note that we use superscripts to distinguish between the vari- 
I ous pricing functions. This is done in order to allow us to use subscripts to denote 
partial derivatives. 
These claims are our "benchmarks", and we now study the claim 
1 
above, the price of which is assumed to have the form 
0 Using the same notational conventions as in Section 13.2, the price dynamics 
of the various derivatives are given by 
d F  = aFFdt + a F F d w ,  
dFi = a i F i d t + u i F i d w ,  z=l, ..., n, 
where 

216 
INCOMPLETE MARKETS 
We can now follow the reasoning of Section 13.2 word-for-word. To 
recapitulate, we form a self-financing portfolio based on the price processes 
[B, F, F1,. . . , Fn]. We then choose the weights so as to make the portfolio locally 
riskless, and finally we try to "beat the bank" by forcing the portfolio to have a 
higher rate of return than the short rate r. 
The conclusion will once again be that, in order to have an arbitrage free 
market, the matrix 
must be singular (recall that ui is a row vector). Assuming that the n x n matrix 
is invertible (with probability 1 for each t) we thus deduce the existence of 
multiplier processes XI@, X(t)), . . . , Xn(t, X(t)) such that 
and 
Since the claim @(X(T)) was chosen arbitrarily we see that the risk premium, 
QF - r, of any asset can be written as a linear combination of the volatility 
components, u ~ j ,  
of the asset, the important point being that the multipliers 
are the same for all assets. The vector process X(t, X(t)) is (see Sections 13.2 
and 15.2) known as the market price (vector) of risk (cf. CAPM), and we 
see that the individual component Xj has the dimension "risk premium per unit 
of j-type volatility" . 
Using the notational conventions of Section 13.2, the A-vector is determined 
by the equation 
i.e. 
X = u-' [a - rl,]. 

THE MULTIDIMENSIONAL CASE 
217 
1 This is precisely eqn (13.15), but in the present setting the volatility matrix a 
and the vector of returns cr are no longer given a priori, so X is not determined 
within the model. We can summarize this as follows: 
a If the derivatives are traded in a no arbitrage market, then there will exist 
a market price of risk vector which is the same for all assets. 
1 a The market price of risk is not determined within the a priori specified 
model. 
a If we exogenously specify the prices of any n assets such that the corres- 
ponding volatility matrix process a is nonsingular with probability 1 for 
all t, then the market price of risk will be uniquely determined by this spe- 
cification and by eqn (15.20). Thus all derivatives will be priced in terms 
of the benchmark prices. 
Note that we can choose the (smooth) benchmark pricing functions above in 
any way whatsoever, subject only to the following conditions: 
a The boundary conditions FYT, x) = ai(x), i = 1, . . . , n are satisfied. 
a The volatility matrix a(t, x) is invertible for aJl (t, x). 
The first condition is obvious. The second is the mathematical formulation of the 
requirement that the family of benchmark derivatives is rich enough to span the 
entire space of derivatives. 
We can easily obtain a PDE for derivative pricing, by writing out eqn (15.19) 
in detail. Using (15.16)-(15.17) we obtain, after some simplification, the following 
result. 
Proposition 15.5 (Pricing equation) If the market is arbitrage free, then the 
arbitrage free price process II(t; a )  is given by n(t; a )  = F(t, X(t)), where F 
solves the boundary value problem 
where XI,. . . , An are universal in the sense that they do not depend on the specific 
choice of derivative. 
A standard application of the Feynman-KaE technique gives us a risk neutral 
valuation formula. 
Proposition 15.6 (Risk neutral valuation) If the market is arbitrage free, 
then there exists a martingale measure Q, such that the pricing function F in 
the proposition above can be represented as 

218 
INCOMPLETE MARKETS 
where the Q-dynamics of the process X are given by 
where AI, . . . , A, 
are universal. 
We have the usual characterization of the martingale measure Q. 
Proposition 15.7 The martingale measure Q has the following properties. 
1. Under Q every price process II (t), be it underlying or derivative, has the 
risk neutral valuation property 
II (t) = e-r(T-t) E?', [ll (T)] . 
2. Under Q every price process II (t), be it underlying or derivative, has the 
short rate of interest as its local rate of return, i.e. the Q-dynamics are of 
the form 
dII (t) = rII (t) dt f II (t) un (t) d W, 
where the volatility vector un is the same under Q as under P. 
3. Under Q every price process II (t), be it underlying or derivative, has the 
property that the normalized price process 
is a martingale, i.e. it has a vanishing drift coeficient. 
Remark 15.3.2 The model formulation above also includes the case when 
some, or all, of the X-components, say XI,. . . , X,, are traded assets (e.g. exo- 
genously given stock prices), whereas the remaining components (if any) are 
nontraded state variables. As a special case we see that if m = k = n, then we 
are back in the case of a complete market treated in Cha~ter 13. 
15.4 A Stochastic Short Rate 
In the theory derived above we have assumed a constant short rate of interest r. 
Let us now assume that we have exactly the same situation as in Section 15.3 
with the following difference. 
Assumption 15.4.1 The short rate of interest is assumed to be a deterministic 
function of the factors, i. e. 
r(t) = r(X(t)). 
(45.22) 
Here we have used a slightly sloppy notation: the r on the left-hand side denotes 
a stochastic process, whereas the r appearing on the right-hand side denotes a 

THE MARTINGALE APPROACH* 
219 
deterministic function. We have thus assumed that the factor vector X com- 
pletely determines the short rate, and as a special case we can of course have 
ne of the factors equal to the short rate itself. 
For this model, we can now go through all our earlier arguments once again, 
d we will easily obtain the following version of Proposition 15.5. 
Proposition 15.8 (Pricing equation) The arbitrage free price process II(t; @) 
is given by II(t; @) = F(t, X(t)), where F solves the boundary value problem 
n 
1 
$ (pz - F 6.AJ) 
Fz + 5tr {6Fxx6} - r(x)F = 0, 
F(T, x) = Wx), 
where XI, . . . , An are the same for all derivatives. 
Again a standard application of the Feynman-KG technique gives us a risk 
neutral valuation formula. 
Proposition 15.9 (Risk neutral valuation) There exists a martingale meas- 
ure Q, such that the pricing function F in the proposition above can be 
F(t, x) = EFX [e- ltf '(x(u)) 
d" - @(x(T))] , 
(15.23) 
where the Q-dynamics of the process X are given by 
dX" 
{pi - &A} dt + bi dW, i = 1,. . . , k, 
. 
h 
and XI,. . . , An are the same for all derivatives. 
15.5 The Martingale Approach* 
From the martingale point of view the setup and results of this entire chapter 
are in fact already covered (in more generality) in Chapter 14 : Let us however, 
briefly recollect some main points. 
, 
Since we have assumed that the only asset given a priori is B and that 
X is not the price vector of traded assets, the normalized price process Z 
, 
is one-dimensional with Z = Zo = BIB = 1. Now: the constant process 
Zo(t) r 1 is a martingale regardless of the choice of measure, so every 
) 
equivalent measure Q will be a martingale measure 
From Proposition 10.25 we always have the risk neutral valuation formula 

220 
INCOMPLETE MARKETS 
for any T-claim y and any specification of the short rate process r. In 
particular, r does not have to be of the form r (t, X(t)). 
Denoting a fixed choice of martingale measure by Q, where cp is the cor- 
responding Girsanov kernel and X = -cp the market price of risk, the 
Q-dynamics of X are 
a In general, the market price of risk process X is just an adapted (possibly 
path dependent) process, so generically X will not be a Markov process 
under Q. 
If we assume that the market price of risk is of the form X(t, X(t)), then 
X will be Markovian under the corresponding Q. In this special case we 
can use the PDE methods discussed earlier in the chapter for pricing. 
15.6 Summing U p  
We may now sum up our experiences from the preceding sections. 
Result 15.6.1 
In an arbitrage free market, regardless of whether the market is complete 
or incomplete, there will exist a market price of risk process, X(t), which is 
common to all assets in the market. More precisely, let Il(t) be any price 
process in the market, with P-dynamics 
Then the following holds, for all t, and P-a.s. 
In a complete market the price of any derivative will be uniquely determ- 
ined by the requirement of absence of arbitrage. In hedging terms this 
means that the price is unique because the derivative can equally well be 
replaced by its replicating portfolio. Phrased in terms of pricing PDEs and 
risk neutral valuation formulas, the price is unique because a complete 
market has the property that the martingale measure Q, or equivalently 
the market price of risk A, is uniquely determined within the model. 
In an incomplete market the requirement of no arbitrage is no longer suf- 
ficient to determine a unique price for the derivative. We have several 
possible martingale measures, and several market prices of risk. The reason 
that there are several possible martingale measures simply means that 
there are several different price systems for the derivatives, all of which are 
consistent with absence of arbitrage. 

SUMMING UP 
221 
Schematically speaking the price of a derivative is thus determined by two 
a We require that the derivative should be priced in such a way so as to 
not introduce arbitrage possibilities into the market. This requirement is 
reflected by the fact that all derivatives must be priced by formula (15.11) 
where the same Q is used for all derivatives, or equivalently by the pricing 
PDE (15.8)-(15.9), where the same X is used for all derivatives. 
In an incomplete market the price is also partly determined, in a nontrivial 
way, by aggregate supply and demand on the market. Supply and demand 
for a specific derivative are in turn determined by the aggregate risk aver- 
sion on the market, as well as by liquidity considerations and other factors. 
All these aspects are aggregated into the particular martingale measure 
used by the market. 
When dealing with derivative pricing in an incomplete market we thus have 
to fix a specific martingale measure Q, or equivalently a A, and the question 
arises as to how this is to be done. 
Who chooses the martingale measure? 
, From the discussions above the answer should by now be fairly clear. 
I 
The market! 
The main implication of this message is that, within our framework, it is 
not the job of the theorist to determine the "correct" market price of risk. The 
market price of risk is determined on the market, by the agents in the market, and 
in particular this means that if we assume a particular structure of the market 
price of risk, then we have implicitly made an assumption about the preferences 
on the market. To take a simple example, suppose that in our computations we 
assume that X = 0. This means in fact that we have assumed that the market is 
risk neutral (why?). 
From this it immediately follows that if we have a concrete model, and we 
want to obtain information about the prevailing market price of risk, then we 
must go to the concrete market and get that information using empirical meth- 
ods. It would of course be nice if we were able to go to the market and ask 
the question "What is today's market price of risk?", or alternatively "Which 
martingale measure are you using?", but for obvious reasons this cannot be done 
in real life. The information that can be obtained from the market is price data, 
so a natural idea is to obtain implicit information about the market price of risk 

222 
INCOMPLETE MARKETS 
using the existing prices on the market. This method, sometimes called "calib- 
rating the model to market data", "backing out the parameters", or LLcomputing 
the implied parameter values", can schematically be described as follows. 
Let us take a concrete model as given, say the one defined by eqn (15.1). We 
assume that we know the exact form of p and a. Our problem is that of pricing 
a fixed claim @(X(T)), and in order to do this we need to know the market price 
of risk X(t, x), and we have to consider two possible scenarios for the derivative 
market, which we are trying to model. 
The first case occurs if there is no existing market for any derivative product 
with X as its underlying object, i.e. no weather insurance contracts for Brighton 
are traded. Then we are stuck. Since the market price of risk is determined by 
the market, then if there is no market, there is no market price of risk. 
The second case occurs if some contracts are already traded. Let us thus 
assume that there exists a market for the claims @((X(T)), i = 1,. . . , n. Let 
us furthermore assume that we want to choose our market price of risk from a 
parameterized family of functions, i.e. we assume a priori that X is of the form 
We have thus a priori specified the functional form of X but we do not know which 
parameter vector p we should use. We then carry out the following scheme. We 
are standing at time t = 0. 
Compute the theoretical pricing functions F1(t, x) for the claims 
al,. . . , @,. 
This is done by solving the pricing PDE for each contract, 
and the result will of course depend on the parameter P, so the pricing 
functions will be of the form 
In particular, by observing today's value of the underlying process, say 
X(0) = xo, we can compute today's theoretical prices of the contracts as 
ni(o; p) = F~(O,ZO; 
p). 
We now go to the concrete market and observe the actually traded prices 
for the contracts, thus obtaining the observed prices 
where the superscript * indicates an observed value. 
We now choose the "implied" parameter vector P* in such a way that 
the theoretical prices are "as close as possible" to the observed prices, i.e. 
such that 
ni*(0) x IIi(O; P*), 
i = 1, . . . , n. 

EXERCISES 
One way, out of many, of formalizing this step is to determine P* by solving 
the least squares minimization problem 
min [k 
(R(o;~) 
- ni*(0) 
)2] . 
P€Rk i=l 
In the theory of interest rates, this procedure is widely used under the name 
I 
of "the inversion of the yield curve" and in that context we will study it in some 
detail. 
1 
As we have repeatedly stressed, the problem of determining the market price 
j of risk is not a theoretical one, but an empirical one. It should, however, be poin- 
ted out that the truth of this statement depends on our particular framework, 
where we have not specified individual preferences at all. An alternative frame- 
work is that of a general equilibrium model, where we have specified the utility 
functions of a number of individuals, and the production functions of a num- 
ber of firms. In such a model all prices, derivative or underlying, as well as the 
market price of risk, will be determined endogenously within the model, so we 
no longer have to go to the market to find A. The price we have to pay for a 
t general equilibrium approach is that we must then specify the individual pref- 
erences, which in turn is essentially equivalent to a specification of the market 
j price of risk. 
15.7 Exercises 
Exercise 15.1 Consider a claim @(X(T)) with pricing function F(t, x). Prove 
Proposition 15.4, i.e. prove that d F  under Q has the form 
where W is a Q-Wiener process. 
Hint: Use It6's formula on F, using the Q-dynamics of X. Then use the fact 
that F satisfies the pricing PDE. 
Exercise 15.2 Convince yourself, either in the scalar or in the multidimensional 
case, that the market price of risk process X really is of the form 
Exercise 15.3 Prove Proposition 15.7 
Exercise 15.4 Consider the scalar model in Section 15.2 and a fixed claim 
F(X(T)). Take as given a pricing function G(t,x), for this claim, satisfying 
the boundary condition G(T,x) = I'(x), and assume that the corresponding 
volatility function aG(t,x) is nonzero. We now expect the market [B,G] to be 
complete. Show that this is indeed the case, i.e. show that every simple claim of 
the form @(X(T)) can be replicated by a portfolio based on B and G. 

224 
INCOMPLETE MARKETS 
Exercise 15.5 Consider the multidimensional model in Section 15.3 and a fixed 
family of claims ai ( X ( T ) )  , i = 1, . . . , n. Take as given a family of pricing func- 
tions Fi(t,x), i = 1,. . . , n, for these claims, satisfying the boundary condition 
FYT, x) = ai (x), i = 1, . . . , n, and assume that the corresponding volatility 
matrix u(t, x) is nonzero. Show that the market [B, F1, . . . , Fn] is complete, 
i.e. show that every simple claim of the form @(X(T)) can be replicated by a 
portfolio based on [B, F1,. . . , Fn]. 
Exercise 15.6 Prove the propositions in Section 15.4. 
15.8 Notes 
As we have seen, in an incomplete market there is generically not a unique price 
for a given claim, and it is impossible to hedge perfectly. A natural idea is then 
to try to find an approximate hedge, and the obvious first choice is to use a 
quadratic loss function. This line of ideas was &st investigated by Follmer and 
Sondermann (1986) and then generalized in Schweizer (1988), Schweizer (1991) 
1 
and many other papers. The quadratic hedging approach has subsequently been , 
the object of intensive research and has led to a large and deep literature. For a 
recent overview with an extensive bibliography see Schweizer (2001). One pos 
sibility of pricing in an incomplete market is to choose, based on some given 
principle, one particular member of the infinite set of possible martingale meas- 
ures. In the quadratic hedging theory one thus ecounters the "minimal martingale 
measure" as well as the "variance optimal measure". The "minimal entropy 
1 
measure" is another canonical choice of a martingale measure where an entropy 
i 
related distance between the objective measure and the martingale measure is 
minimized. This approach was introduced by Miyahara (1997) and developed 
by Frittelli in several papers such as Frittelli (2000). The "Esscher measure", 
discussed in Gerber and Shiu (1994), is related to actuarial mathematics. For a 
utility approach to pricing in incomplete markets see Davis (1997). For textbook 
treatments of incomplete markets, see Bingham and Kiesel (1998) and Dana and 
Jeanblanc (2003). 
. . ' 
'C, 
t;< 
' 
,' 
" 
i ,  
L':, 
I I 
t I 
< . $  
3 ,  
. 
. , . ' , 
8 ,  
* ,<: 
jq, 
5 

I 
DIVIDENDS 
F The object of the present chapter is to study pricing problems for contingent 
claims which are written on dividend paying underlying assets. In real life the 
vast majority of all traded options are written on stocks having at least one 
dividend left before the date of expiration of the option. Thus the study of 
dividends is important from a practical point of view. Furthermore, it turns out 
that the theory developed in this chapter will be of use in the study of currency 
derivatives and we will also need it in connection with future contracts. 
1 
16.1 Discrete Dividends 
1 
16.1.1 Price Dynamics and Dividend Stmctuw 
, 
We consider an underlying asset ("the stock") with price process S, over a fixed 
time interval [0, TI. We take as given a number of deterministic points in time, 
TI, . . ,  ,,where 
, 
The interpretation is that at these points in time dividends are paid out to the 
holder of the stock. We now go on to construct a model for the stock price process 
as well as for the dividend structure, and we assume that, under the objective 
probability measure P, the stock price has the following dynamics, between 
dividends. 
d S  = aSdt + aSdW. 
(16.1) 
To be quite precise we assume that the S-process satisfies the SDE above on 
each half-open interval of the form [Ti+l, Ti), i = 1, . . . , n - 1, as well as on the 
intervals [0, Tn) and [TI, TI. 
The first conceptual issue that we have to deal with concerns the interpreta- 
tion of St as "the price of the stock at time t", and the problem to be handled 
is the following: do we regard St as the price immediately after, or immedi- 
ately before, the payment of a dividend? From a logical point of view we can 
choose any interpretation-nothing is affected in real terms, but our choice of 
interpretation will affect the notation below. We will in fact choose the first 
interpretation, i.e. we view the stock price as the price ex dividend. If we think 
of the model on an infinitesimal time scale we have the interpretation that, if t 
is a dividend point, dividends are paid out, not at the time point t, but rather 
at t - dt or, if you will, at t-. 
Next we go on to model the size of the dividends. 

226 
DMDENDS 
Assumption 16.1.1 We assume 
as 
given a deterministic continuous 
function 6[s] 
6 : R + R .  
The dividend 6, at a dividend time t, is assumed to have the form 
Note that the assumption above guarantees that the size of the dividend 6 at 
a dividend time t is already determined at t-. The reason that we are using the 
bracket notation 6[St-] instead of the more standard 6(St-) is that in this way 
we avoid some hard-to-read formulas with repeated parenthesis signs later on. 
Our next problem concerns the behavior of the stock price at a dividend point 
t, and an easy (but slightly heuristic) arbitrage argument (see the exercises) gives 
us the following result. 
Proposition 16.1 (Jump condition) In order to avoid arbitrage possibilities 
the following jump condition must hold at every dividend point t: 
The stock price structure can now be summarized as follows: 
Between dividend points the stock price process satisfies the SDE 
Immediately before a dividend time t ,  i.e. at t - = t - dt, we observe the 
stock price St-. 
Given the stock price above, the size of the dividend is determined as 6[St-1. 
"Between" t - dt and t the dividend is paid out. 
At time t the stock price has a jump, determined by 
16.1.2 Pricing Contingent Claims 
As usual we consider a fixed contingent T-claim of the form 
where @ is some given deterministic function, and our immediate problem is 
to find the arbitrage free price process n(t; X) for the claim X. We will solve 
this problem by a recursive procedure where, starting at T and then working 
backwards in time, we will compute n(t; X) for each intra-dividend interval 
separately. 

DISCRETE DMDENDS 
T I I t I T :  
We start by computing II(t; X) for t E [TI, TI. Since our interpretation of the 
stock price is ex dividend, this means that we are actually facing a problem 
without dividends over this interval. Thus, for TI 5 t 5 T, we have lI(t; X) = 
F(t, St) where F solves the usual Black-Scholes equation 
I 
F (T, s) = *(s). 
In particular, the pricing function at TI is given by F(Tl, s). 
T2 I t  < TI: 
Now we go on to compute the price of the claim for T2 5 t I TI. We start by 
computing the pricing function F at the time immediately before TI, i.e. at 
t = Tl -. Suppose, therefore, that we are holding one unit of the contingent 
claim, and let us assume that the price at time TI- is STl- = S. This is the 
price cum dividend, and in the next infinitesimal interval the following will 
happen: 
The dividend 6[s] will be paid out to the shareholders. 
At time TI the stock price will have dropped to s - 6[s]. 
We are now standing at time TI, holding a contract which is worth 
F(T1, s - 6[s]). The value of F at TI has, however, already been 
computed in the previous step, so we have the jump condition 
It now remains to compute F for T2 I t < TI, but this turns out to be quite 
easy. We are holding a contingent claim on an underlying asset which over 
the interval [T2, TI) is not paying dividends. Thus the standard Black-Scholes 
argument applies, which means that F has to solve the usual Black-Scholes 
equation 
aF 
d F  1 
d2F 
- 
+ rs- + -s202- 
- rF = 0, 
at 
as 
2 
as2 
over this interval. The boundary value is now given by the jump condition 
(16.3) above. Another way of putting this is to say that, over the half-open 
interval [T2, TI), we have F(t, s) = F1(t, s) where F1 solves the following 
boundary value problem over the closed interval [T2, TI]. 
aF1 1 
8 2 ~ 1  
+ rs- 
+ -s202- 
- rF1 = 0, 
as 
2 
as2 
Thus we have determined F on [T2, TI). 

DIVIDENDS 
T 3 5 t < T 2 :  
Now the story repeats itself. At T2 we will again have the jump condition 
and over the half-open interval [T3, T2) F has to satisfy the Black-Scholes 
equation. 
We may summarize our results as follows. 
Proposition 16.2 (Pricing equation) The pricing function F(t, s) is deter- 
mined by the following recursive procedure: 
On the interval [TI, TI F solves the boundary value problem 
I 
F (T, s) = +(s) . 
At each dividend point Ti, F has to satisfy the jump condition 
On every half-open interval of the form [Ti+1,Ti), i = 1,2,. . . , n - 1, as 
well as on the interval [0, T,), F solves the Black-Scholes equation 
dF 
dF 
1 
d2F 
- 
+ rs- 
+ -s2a2- 
6t 
-rF=O. 
as 
2 
as2 
Another way of formulating this result in order to stress the recursive nature 
of the procedure is as follows. 
Proposition 16.3 
On the interval [TI, TI we have F(t, s) = F O ( ~ ,  s), where F0 solves the 
bounda ry value problem 
On each half-open interval [Ti+1, Ti) we have F(t, s) = Fi(t, s) for i = 
1,2,. . ., where Fi, over the closed interval [T+l, Ti], solves the boundary 
value problem 
{ 
,Fa 
1 
d2Fi 
+ rs- 
+ -s2a2- 
- rFi = 0, 
ds 
2 
as2 
(16.8) 
F i ( ~ i ,  
S )  = Fi-'(Ti, s - 6[s]). 

I 
DISCRETE DIVIDENDS 
229 
Throughout the entire section we have assumed the standard Black-Scholes 
price dynamics (16.1) between dividends. It is easy to see that we also have the 
following more general result. 
Proposition 16.4 Assume that the stock price dynamics between dividends are 
of the form 
dSt = Sta(t, St)dt + Sta(t, St) dWt. 
(16.9) 
Assume furthermore that the dividend structure as before is given by 
Then the results of Propositions 16.2 and 16.9 still hold, provided that the 
constant u is replaced by the function u(t, s) in the PDEs. 
We now turn to the possibility of obtaining a probabilistic "risk neutral valu- 
ation" formula for the contingent claim above, and as in the PDE approach this 
is done in a recursive manner. 
For Tl 5 t 5 T the situation is simple. Since we have no dividend points left 
we may use the old risk neutral valuation formula to obtain 
r '  
Here the Q-dynamics of the stock price are given by 
and we have used the notation F0 to emphasize that in this interval there are 
zero dividend points left. Note that the Q-dynamics of S above are only defined 
for the interval [TI, TI. 
For T2 5 t < TI the situation is slightly more complicated. From Proposition 
16.3 we know that the pricing function, which on this interval is denoted by F1, 
solves the PDE 
We may now apply the Feynman-KaE Theorem 5.6 to obtain the stochastic 
representation 
F' (t, s) = e-r(T1-t)~t,, [F'(TI, XT, - ~[xT~])] 
where the process X ,  which at this point only acts as a computational dummy, 
is defined by 
dX = rXdt+oXdW. 
(16.12) 

230 
DIVIDENDS 
Notice that the dummy process X is defined by (16.12) over the entire closed 
interval [T2, TI] (whereas the pricing function F1 is the relevant pricing function 
only over the half-open interval [T2, TI)). This implies that X has continuous tra- 
jectories over the closed interval [T2, TI], so in particular we see that XTl- = XT,. 
We may thus rewrite (16.11) as 
F' (t, S) = e-T(T1-t) E ~ , ~  
[F'(T~, XTl - - d [ ~ ~ ~ - ] ) ] ,  
still with the X-dynamics (16.12) on the closed interval [T2, TI]. 
Let us now define the Q-dynamics for S over the closed interval [T2,Tl] by 
writing 
d S = ~ S d t + u S d W ,  
for the half-open interval [T2, TI) and adding the jump condition 
ST, = ST,- -  ST,-]. 
In this notation we can now write (16.13) as 
J'l (t, s) = e-'(Tl-t)~Q t , ~ [  
F0 ( T ST^)], 
and, plugging in our old expression for FO, we obtain 
Taking the discount factor out of the expectation, and using standard rules for 
iterated conditional expectations, this formula can be reduced to 
F' (t, s) = e-T(T-t) E:~ [@(ST)]. 
We may now iterate this procedure for each intra-dividend interval to obtain 
the following risk neutral valuation result, which we formulate in its more 
general version. 
Proposition 16.5 (Risk neutral valuation) Consider a T-claim of the fonn 
@(ST) as above. Assume that the price dynamics between dividends are given by 
dSt = a(t, St)& dt + ~ ( t ,  
&)St dW, 
and that the dividend size at a dividend point t is given by 
b = 6[St-I. 
Then the arbitrage free pricing function F(t, s) has the representation 
F(t, s) = e-'(T-t) E$ [@(ST)], 

1 
CONTINUOUS DIVIDENDS 
where the Q-dynamics of S between dividends are given by 
I 
dSt = TS~ 
dt + ~ ( t ,  
St)& dW, 
(16.15) 
1 
1 with the jump condition 
St =,St- - 6[St-] 
at each dividend point, i.e. at t = TI, T2, 
. . . , Tn. 
We end
Ythis section by specializing to the case when we have the standard 
I Black-Scholes dynamics 
d s  = a S d t + a s d ~  
(16.17) 
I 
1 between dividends, and the dividend structure has the particularly simple form 
where 6 on the right-hand side denotes a positive constant. 
As usual we consider the T-claim @(ST) and, in order to emphasize the role 
of the parameter 6, we let Fa(t, s) denote the pricing function for the claim a. In 
/ particular we observe that Fo is our standard pricing function for 
in a model 
with no dividends at all. Using the risk neutral valuation formula above, it is 
not hard to prove the following result. 
Proposition 16.6 Assume that the P-dynamics of the stock price and the divi- 
dend structure are given by (1 6.17)-(16.18). Then the following relation holds: 
Fa(t, S) = Fo(t, (1 - 6)n . s), 
(16.19) 
where n is the number of dividend points in the interval (t, Tj. 
Proof See the exercises. 
The point of this result is of course that in the simple setting of (16:17)- 
(16.18) we may use our "old" formulas for no dividend models in order to price 
contingent claims in the presence of dividends. In particular we may use the 
standard Black-Scholes formula for European call options in order to price call 
options on a dividend paying stock. Note, however, that in order to obtain these 
nice results we must assume both (16.17) and (16.18). 
16.2 Continuous Dividends 
In this section we consider the case when dividends are paid out continuously 
in time. As usual St denotes the price of the stock at time t, and by D(t) we 
denote the cumulative dividends over the interval [0, t]. Put in differential form 
this means that over the infinitesimal interval (t, t + dt] the holder of the stock 
receives the amount dD(t) = D(t + dt) - D(t). 

16.2.1 Continuous Dividend Yield 
We start by analyzing the simplest case of continuous dividends, which is when 
we have a continuous dividend yield. 
Assumption 16.2.1 The price dynamics, under the objective probability meas- 
ure, are given by 
dSt = St . a(St) dt + St . u(St) d ~ t .  
(16.20) 
The dividend structure is assumed to be of the form 
dD(t) = St . 6[St] dt, 
(16.21) 
where 6 is a wntinuous deterministic function. 
The most common special case is of course when the functions a and u above 
are deterministic constants, and when the function 6 is a deterministic constant. 
We note that, since we have no discrete dividends, we do not have to worry about 
the interpretation of the stock price as being ex dividend or cum dividend. 
The problem to be solved is again that of determining the arbitrage free price 
for a T-claim of the form @(ST). This turns out to be quite easy, and we can 
in fact follow the strategy of Chapter 7. More precisely we recall the following 
scheme: 
1. Assume that the pricing function is of the form F (t, St). 
2. Consider a, cr, @, F, 6, and r as exogenously given. 
3. Use the general results from Section 6.2 to describe the dynamics of the 
value of a hypothetical self-financed portfolio based on the derivative 
instrument and the underlying stock. 
4. Form a self-financed portfolio whose value process V has a stochastic 
differential without any driving Wiener process, i.e. it is of the form 
dV(t) = V(t)k(t) dt. 
5. Since we have assumed absence of arbitrage we must have k = r. 
6. The condition k = T will in fact have the form of a partial differential 
equation with F as the unknown function. In order for the market to be 
efficient F must thus solve this PDE. 
7. The equation has a unique solution, thus giving us the unique pricing 
formula for the derivative, which is consistent with absence of arbitrage. 
We now carry out this scheme and, since the calculations are very close to those 
in Chapter 7, we will be rather brief. 
Denoting the relative weights of the portfolio invested in the stock and in 
the derivative by us and UF, respectively we obtain (see Section 6.3) the value 
process dynamics as 

CONTINUOUS DIVIDENDS 
where the gain differential dGs for the stock is given by 
dGs = dS + dD, 
i.e. 
dGs = S(a + 6) dt + a
~
d
~
.
 
From the It6 formula we have the usual expression for the derivative dynamics 
d F  = a F ~ d t + a F ~ d W ,  
where 
1 
OF 
bF = - '0s-. 
F 
a s  
Collecting terms in the value equation gives us 
dV = V - {us(a: + 6) + uFffF) dt + V .  {usQ + UFUF) dW, 
and we now determine the portfolio weights in order to obtain a value process 
without a driving Wiener process, i.e. we defme US and UF as the solution to 
the system 
U s 0  + UFUF = 0, 
u S + u F = l .  
4 
This system has the solution 
rtj ,% 
QF 
us = - 
b F - u 7  
rc~t I'I 
-0 
uF = - 
u F - a '  
h n RJ 
, 
and leaves us with the value dyna;mics 
dV = V {uS(a + 6) + uFaF) dt. 
, I .  
Absence of arbitrage now implies that we must have the equation 

F"" 
with probability 1, for all t, and, substituting the expressions for UF, us, OF, 
and OF into this equation, we get the equation 
The boundary value is obvious, so we have the following result. 
1 
Proposition 16.7 The pricing function F(t, s) of the claim @(ST) 
solves the 
boundary value problem 
Applying the Feynman-KaE representation theorem immediately gives us 
a risk neutral valuation formula. 
1 
Proposition 16.8 (Pricing equation) The pricing function has the repres- 
entation 
F(t, s) = e-'(T-t)~fs [@(ST)], 
(16.23) 
where the Q-dynamics of S are given by 
dSt = (r - 8[St])St dt + u(St)St dWt . 
(16.24) 1 
In contrast with the case of discrete dividends we see that the appropriate 
martingale measure in the dividend case differs from that of the no dividend 
case. It is left as an exercise to prove the following result. 
! 
Proposition 16.9 (Risk neutral valuation) Under the martingale measure. 
! 
Q, the normalized gain process 
1 
Note that this property is quite reasonable from an economic point of view: 
in a risk neutral world today's stock price should be the expected value of all 
future discounted earnings which arise from holding the stock. In other words, 
we expect that 
t 
S(0) = [l 
e-rr dD(r) + e-"~(t)] , 
(16.25) 
and in the exercises the reader is invited to prove this "cost of carry" formula. 1 

CONTINUOUS DIVIDENDS 
235 
As in the discrete case it is natural to analyze the pricing formulas for the 
special case when we have the standard Black-Scholes dynamics 
dS = aSdt + uSdW, 
(16.26) 
, where a and a axe constants. We also assume that the dividend function 6 is 
I a deterministic constant. This implies that the martingale dynamics are given by 
dS = (r - 6)Sdt + oSdW, 
(16.27) 
i.e. S is GBM also under the risk adjusted probabilities. Again we denote the 
pricing function by Fa in order to highlight the dependence upon the parameter 6. 
It is now easy to prove the following result, which shows how to price derivatives 
for a dividend paying stock in terms of pricing functions for a nondividend case. 
Proposition 16.10 Assume that the functions o and 6 are constant. Then, with 
notation as above, we have 
F6 (t , s) = Fo(t, se -6(T-t) 1. 
(16.28) 
i 
"6.2.2 
The General Case 
We now consider a more general dividend structure, which we will need when 
dealing with future contracts in Chapter 26. 
Assumption 16.2.2 The price dynamics, under the objective probability meas- 
ure, are given by 
1 
dSt = St . (St) dt + St ' u (St) d Wt . 
(16.29) 
The dividend structure is assumed to be of the form 
dD(t) = St . d[St] dt + St-#&] dWt, 
(16.30) 
where 6 and y are continuous deterministic functions. 
We again consider the pricing problem for a contingent T-claim of the form 
and the only difference from the continuous yield case is that now we have to 
assume that the pricing function for the claim is a function of D as well as S. 
We thus assume a claim price process of the form 
and then we carry out the standard program 1-7 of the previous section. 

236 
DIVIDENDS 
After a large number of simple, but messy and extremely boring, calculations 
which (needless to say) are left as an exercise, we end up with the following result. 
Proposition 16.11 (Pricing equation) The pricing function F(t, s, D) for 
the claim X = @(ST) 
solves the boundary value problem 
where 
Using the Feynman-KaE technique we have the following risk neutral valuation 
result. 
Proposition 16.12 (Risk neutral valuation) The pricing function has the 
representation 
F(t, s, D) = e-r(T-t)~Q 
t , , , ~  
[@(ST)I, 
where the Q-dynamics of S and D are given by 
Remark 16.2.1 In the expressions of the propositions above we have sup 
pressed St and s in the functions a, a, 6, y. 
The role of the martingale measure is the same as in the previous section. 
Proposition 16.13 The martingale measure Q is characterized by the follow- 
ing facts: 
There exists a market price of risk process X such that the Q-dynamics are 
in the form 
dS = S(a - Xu) dt + So dW, 
dD = S(6 - Xy) dt + Sy dW. 

EXERCISES 
I 
The normalized gains process Gz, defined by 
is a Q-martingale. 
This result has extensions to multidimensional factor models. We will not go 
into details, but are content with stating the main result. 
Proposition 16.14 Consader a general factor model of the form in Sections 
15.3-15.4. If the market is free of arbitrage, then there will exist universal market 
price of risk processes X = (XI,. . . , Xk)* such that 
For any T-claim X the pricing finction F has the representation 
I 
The Q-dynamics of the factor processes X1,. 
. . , xk are of the form 
1 
For any price process S (underlying or derivative) with dividend process 
1 
I 
D, the normalized gains process 
1 
16.3 Exercises 
Exercise 16.1 Prove Proposition 16.1. Assume that you are standing at t- 
and that the conclusion of the theorem does not hold. Show that by trading 
' 
at t- and t you can then create an arbitrage. This is mathematically slightly 
imprecise, and the advanced reader is invited to provide a precise proof based 
on the martingale approach of Chapter 10. 
Exercise 16.2 Prove the cost-of-carry formula (16.25). 
Exercise 16.3 Derive a cost-of-carry formula for the case of discrete dividends. 
Exercise 16.4 Prove Proposition 16.9. 
Exercise 16.5 Prove Proposition 16.10. 
Exercise 16.6 Consider the Black-Scholes model with a constant continuous 
dividend yield S. Prove the following put-call parity relation, where ca (pa) 
denotes the price of a European call (put). 

238 
DIVIDENDS 
Exercise 16.7 Consider the Black-Scholes model with a constant discrete 
dividend, as in eqns (16.17)-(16.18). Derive the relevant put-call parity for this 
case, given that there are n remaining dividend points. 
Exercise 16.8 Consider the Black-Scholes model with a constant continuous 
dividend yield 6. The object of this exercise is to show that this model is com- 
plete. Take, therefore, as given a contingent claim X = @(S(T)). Show that this 
claim can be replicated by a self-financing portfolio based on B and S, and that 
the portfolios weights are given by 
where F is the solution of the pricing eqn (16.8). 
Hint: Copy the reasoning from Chapter 8, while using the self-financing 
dynamics given in Section 6.3. 
Exercise 16.9 Consider the Black-Scholes model with a constant continuous 
dividend yield 6. Use the result from the previous exercise in order to compute 
explicitly the replicating portfolio for the claim @(S(T)) = S(T). 
Exercise 16.10 Check that, when .y. = 0 in Section 16.2.2, all results degenerate 
into those of Section 16.2.1. 
Exercise 16.11 Prove Propositions 16.11-16.13. 

17 
CURRENCY DERIVATIVES 
In this chapter, we will study a model which incorporates not only the usual 
domestic equity market, but also a market for the exchange rate between the 
domestic currency and a fixed foreign currency, as well as a foreign equity market. 
Financial derivatives defined in such situations are commonly known as quanto 
products. We will start by studying derivatives written directly on the exchange 
rate X, and then go on to study how to price (in the domestic currency) contracts 
written on foreign equity. 
17.1 Pure Currency Contracts 
Consider a situation where we have two currencies: the domestic currency (say 
pounds sterling), and the foreign currency (say US dollars). The spot exchange 
rate at time t is denoted by X(t), and by definition it is quoted as 
units of the domestic currency 
unit of the foreign currency ' 
i.e. in our example it is quoted as pounds per dollar. We assume that the domestic 
short rate rd, as well as the foreign short rate rf, are deterministic constants, 
and we denote the corresponding riskless asset prices by Bd and Bf, respect- 
ively. Furthermore we assume that the exchange rate is modeled by geometric 
Brownian motion. We can summarize this as follows. 
Assumption 17.1.1 We take as given the following dynamics (under the 
objective probability measure P): 
dX = Xax dt + Xux d q  
(17.1) 
dBd = rdBd dt, 
(17.2) 
dBf = rfBf dt, 
(17.3) 
where ax, ux are deterministic constants, and w is a scalar Wiener process. 
Our problem is that of pricing a currency derivative, i.e. a T-claim 2 of the 
form 
, 
2 = @(X(T)), 
where @ is some given deterministic function. To take a concrete and important 
example, we can consider the case when 2 = max [X(T) - K, 01, i.e. we have a 

240 
CURRENCY DERIVATIVES 
European call which gives the owner the option to buy one unit of the foreign 
currency at the price K (in the domestic currency). 
At &st glance it may perhaps seem that the problem of pricing the call 
option above is solved by use of the standard Black-Scholes formula, where we 
use domestic rate rd as the short rate of interest, and the stock price S is replaced 
by the exchange rate X. It is, however, important to understand that this line 
of argument is incorrect, and the reason is as follows. When we buy a stock 
(without dividends), this means that we buy a piece of paper, which we keep 
until we sell it. When we buy a foreign currency (say US dollars) we will, on 
the contrary, not just keep the physical dollar bills until we sell them again. 
Instead we will typically put the dollars into an account where they will grow at 
a certain rate of interest. The obvious implication of this fact is that a foreign 
currency plays very much the same role as a domestic stock with a continu- 
ous dividend, and we will show below that this is indeed the case. First we 
formalize the institutional assumptions. 
Assumption 17.1.2 All markets are frictionless and liquid. All holdings of the 
foreign currency are invested in the foreign riskless asset, i.e. they will evolve 
according to the dynamics 
dBf = rfBf dt. 
Remark 17.1.1 Interpreted literally this means that, for example, US dollars 
are invested in a US bank. In reality this does not have to be the c a s e U S  dollars 
bought in Europe will typically be placed in a European so called Eurodollar 
account where they will command the Eurodollar rate of interest. 
Applying the standard theory of derivatives to the present situation we have 
the usual risk neutral valuation formula 
n(t; 2) 
= e-rdd(T-t)~Q 
t,, ~@(X(T))I, 
and our only problem is to figure out what the martingale measure Q looks 
like. To do this we use the result from Proposition 13.3, that Q is characterized 
by the property that every domestic asset has the short rate r d  as its local 
rate of return under Q. In order to use this characterization we have to translate 
the possibility of investing in the foreign riskless asset into domestic terms. Since 
Bf (t) units of the foreign currency are worth Bf (t)-X(t) in the domestic currency 
we immediately have the following result. 
Lemma 17.1 The possibility of buying the foreign currency, and investing it at 
the foreign short mte of interest, is equivalent to the possibility of investing in a 
domestic asset with price process Bf, where 
~f (t) = Bf (t) . X(t). 
The dynamics of Bf are given by 
dBf = Bf (ax + r f ) d t +  BfaxdW 

PURECURRENCYCONTRACTS 
f 
Summing up we see that our currency model is equivalent to a model of a 
/ domestic market consisting of the assets Bd and Bf. It now follows directly from 
the general results that the martingale measure Q has the property that the 
Q-dynamics of Bf are given by 
I where W is a Q-Wiener process. Since by definition we have 
we can use Itb's formula, (17.2) and (17.4) to obtain the Q-dynamics of X as 
dX = X (rd - rf) dt + Xux dW. 
(17.6) 
The basic pricing result follows immediately. 
Proposition 17.2 (Pricing formulas) The arbitrage free price II(t; a )  for the 
T-claim 2 = @(X(T)) is given by n(t; a )  = F(t, X(t)), where 
and where the Q-dynamics of X are given by 
Alternatively F(t,x) can be obtained as the solution to the boundary value 
Proof The risk neutral valuation formula (17.7)-(17.8) follows from the stand- 
ard risk neutral valuation formula and (17.6). The PDE result then follows via 
Feynman-K&. 
Comparing (17.8) to (16.27) we see that our original guess was correct: a 
foreign currency is to be treated exactly as a stock with a continuous dividend. 
We may thus drab upon the results from Section 16.2 (see Proposition-16.10), 
which allows us to use pricing formulas for stock prices (without dividends) to 
price currency derivatives. 
Proposition 17.3 (Option pricing formula) Let Fo(t, x) be the pricing 
function for the claim 2 = @(X(T)), in a world where we interpret X as the 
price of an ordinary stock without dividends. Let F(t, x) be the pricing function 

242 
CURRENCY DERIVATIVES 
of the same claim when X is interpreted as an exchange rate. Then the following 
relation holds 
F(t, x) = Fo(t, xe-'f (T-t)). 
In particular, the price of the European call, 2 =- max [X(T) - K, 01, on the 
foreign currency, is given by the modified Black-Scholes formula 
where 
17.2 Domestic and Foreign Equity Markets 
In this section we will model a market which, apart from the objects of the 
previous section, also includes a domestic equity with (domestic) price Sd, and 
a foreign equity with (foreign) price Sf. The restriction to a single domestic and 
foreign equity is made for notational convenience, and in most practical cases it 
is also sufficient. 
We model the equity dynamics as geometric Brownian motion, and since we 
now have three risky assets we use a three-dimensional Wiener process in order 
to obtain a complete market. 
Assumption 17.2.1 The dynamic model of the entire economy, under the 
objective measure P, is as follows: 
dX = Xax dt + Xux d w ,  
dsd = Sd(Yd dt i- Sdad d w ,  
, ! j  
dSf = Sfaf dt + Sfaf dW, 
, a 
dBd = rdBd dt, 
dBf = rfBf dt, 
where 
is a three-dimensional Wiener process (as usual with independent components). 
Furthermore, the (3 x 3)-dimensional matrix a, given by 
is assumed to be invertible. 

DOMESTIC AND FOREIGN EQUITY MARKETS 
243 
Remark 17.2.1 The reason for the assumption about cr is that this is the 
necessary and sufficient condition for completeness. See Proposition 17.4. 
Remark 17.2.2 It is also possible, and in many situations convenient, to model 
the market using three scalar correlated Wiener processes (one for each asset). 
See Remark 17.2.4. 
Typical T-contracts which we may wish to price (in terms of the domestic 
currency) are given by the following list: 
A foreign equity call, struck in foreign currency, i.e. an option to buy 
one unit of the foreign equity at the strike price of K units of the foreign 
currency. The value of this claim at the date of expiration is, expressed in 
I 
the foreign currency, given by 
I i 
2f = max [Sf (T) - K, 01. 
(17.16) 
Expressed in terms of the domestic currency the value of the claim at T is 
I 
zd = X(T) max [Sf (T) - K, 01. 
(17.17) 
A foreign equity call, struck in domestic currency, i.e. a European 
option to buy one unit of the foreign equity at time T, by paying K units 
of the domestic currency. Expressed in domestic terms this claim is given 
by 
zd = max [X(T) . Sf(T) - K, 01. 
(17.18) 
An exchange option which gives us the right to exchange one unit of 
the domestic equity for one unit of the foreign equity. The corresponding 
claim, expressed in terms of the domestic currency, is 
zd = max [X(T) . Sf (T) - Sd(T), 01. 
(17.19) 
More generally we will study pricing problems for T-claims of the form 
where 2 is measured in the domestic currency. From the general theory of 
Chapter 13 we know that the pricing function F(t, x, sd, sf) is given by the 
risk neutral valuation formula 
F(t, 2, sa, sf) = e-Td(T-t)E2z,sd,8f 
[@(x(T))], 
so we only have to find the correct risk adjusted measure Q. We follow the 
technique of the previous section and transform all foreign traded assets into 
domestic terms. The foreign bank account has already been taken care of, and it 
is obvious that one unit of the foreign stock, worth Sf(t) in the foreign currency, 
is worth X(t) - Sf (t) in domestic terms. We thus have the following equivalent 
domestic model, where the asset dynamics follow from the It8 formula. 

244 
CURRENCY DERIVATIVES 
Proposition 17.4 The original market (17.11)-(17.15) is equivalent to a 
market consisting of the price processes Sd, Sf, Bf, Bd, where 
Bf (t) = X(t)Bf (t), 
Sf (t) = X(t)Sf (t). 
The P-dynamics of this equivalent model are given by 
dSd = S d  a d dt + Sdud dW , 
(17.21) 
dSf = Sf (af +ax +of&) dt + sf (gf +ax) dW, 
(17.22) 
dBf = Bf ( a x  + rf) dt + Bfox d w ,  
(17.23) 
dBd = rdBd dt. 
(17.24) 
Here we have used * to denote transpose, so 
Note that, because of Assumption 17.2.1, the volatility matrix above is invertible, 
so the market is complete. 
Since Sd, Sf, Bf can be interpreted as prices of domestically traded assets, 
we can easily obtain the relevant &-dynamics. 
Proposition 17.5 The Q-dynamics are as follows: 
Proof Equations (17.25)-(17.27) follow from Proposition 13.3. The equation 
for X follows from (17.27), the relation X = B f / ~ f  
and It6's formula. A similar 
computation applied to the relation Sf = Sf /X gives us (17.29). 
We can now immediately obtain the risk neutral valuation formula, and this 
can in fact be done in two ways. We can either use (X, Sd, Sf) as state variables, 
or use the equivalent (there is a one-to-one mapping) set (X, Sd, Sf). Which set 
to use is a matter of convenience, depending on the particular claim under study, 
but in both cases the arbitrage free price is given by the discounted expected 
value of the claim under the Q-dynamics. (It is of course quite possible to use 
the set (Bf, Sd, Sf) also, but there seems to be no point in doing so.) 


246 
CURRENCY DERIVATIVES 
Remark 17.2.3 In many applications the claim under study is of the restricted 
form 
In this case all partial derivatives w.r.t. sd vanish from the PDEs above. A similar 
reduction will of course also take place for a claim of the form 
We end this section by pricing the contracts (17.16) and (17.18) above. 
Example 17.8 (Foreign call, struck in foreign currency) We recall that 
the value of the claim, at time T, expressed in the foreign currency, is 
zf = max [Sf (T) - K, 01. 
Let us denote the pricing function, again in the foreign currency, for this claim 
at time t, by Ff(t,sf). (It will obviously not involve x.) Furthermore we 
denote value of the claim at time t, expressed in the domestic currency, by 
Fd(t, x, sf). Now an elementary arbitrage argument (which?) immediately gives 
us the relation 
so it only remains to compute ~ f ( t ,  
s f )  This, however, is just the value of a 
European call on a stock with volatility IIcf 11, in an economy with a short rate 
equal to rf. Thys the value is given by the Black-Scholes formula, and the pricing 
formula in domestic terms is as follows: 
where 
- 3  , 
See also Remark 17.2.4 for another formalism. 

Example 17.9 (Foreign call, struck in domestic currency) The 
claim, 
expressed in domestic terms, is given by 
zd = max [x(T) . sf (TI - K, oj 
which we write as 
zd = m a x [ ~ f ( ~ ) -  
K,o]. 
As we have seen above, the process sf can be interpreted as the price process of 
a domestically traded asset, and from Proposition 17.5 we see that its volatility 
is given by [laf + ax 11. Thus we may again use the Black-Scholes formula to 
obtain the pricing function F(t, If) as 
F(t, If) = SfN[dl] - e-'d(T-t)~~[d2], 
where 
1 
'. 
dl(t, If) = 
B 
10, + 0x11- 
{ln($)+(rd+Zlluf+ux~~ 
( ~ - t ) ,  
8 d2(t, Sf) = d ~ ( t ,  
Bf) - llof + u x l l f i .  
2> 
1 
See also Remark 17.2.4 for another formalism. 
Remark 17.2.4 In practical applications it may be more convenient to model 
the market, and easier to read the formulas above, if we model the market using 
correlated Wiener processes (see Section 4.8). We can formulate our basic model 
(under Q) as 
dX = X a x  dt + X6x dvx, 
dsd = S d a d  dt + Sd6d dVd, 
dSf = Sfaf dt +Sfdf dVf, 
dBd = rdBd dt, 
e 
dBf = rfBf dt, 
where the three processes Vx, Vd, Vf are one-dimensional correlated Wiener pro- 
cesses. We assume that bx, bd, 6 f are positive. The instantaneous correlation 
between Vx and Vf is denoted by pxf and correspondingly for the other pairs. 
We then have the following set of translation rules between the two formalisms 

248 
CURRENCY DERIVATIVES 
17.3 Domestic and Foreign Market Prices of Risk 
This section constitutes a small digression in the sense that we will not derive 
any new pricing formulas. Instead we will take a closer look at the various mar- 
ket prices of risk. As will be shown below, we have to distinguish between the 
domestic and the foreign market price of risk, and we will clarify the connection 
between these two objects. As a by-product we will obtain a somewhat deeper 
understanding of the concept of risk neutrality. 
Let us therefore again consider the international model X, Sd, Sf, Bd, Bf, 
with dynamics under the objective measure P given by (17.11)-(17.15). As 
before we transform the international model into the domestically traded assets 
Sd, Sf, Bd, B~ with P-dynamics given by (17.21)-(17.24). 
In the previous section we used the general results from Chapter 13 to infer 
the existence of a martingale measure Q, under which all domestically traded 
assets command the domestic short rate rd as the local rate of return. Our 
first observation is that, from a logical point of view, we could just as well 
have chosen to transform (17.11)-(17.15) into equivalent assets traded on the 
foreign market. Thus we should really denote our "old" martingale measure Q 
by Qd in order to emphasize its dependence on the domestic point of view. If 
we instead take a foreign investor's point of view we will end up with a "foreign 
martingale measure," which we will denote by Qf, and an obvious project is to 
investigate the relationship between these martingale measures. A natural guess 
is perhaps that Qd = Qf, but as we shall see this is generically not the case. Since 
there is a one-to-one correspondence between martingale measures and market 
prices of risk, we will carry out the project above in terms of market prices 
of risk. 
We start by taking the domestic point of view, and applying Result 15.6.1 
to the domestic price processes (17.21)-(17.24), we infer the existence of the 
domestic market price of risk process 
Ad1 (t) 
Ad(t) = [ *d1(t) ] 
Ad3(t) 
with the property that if II is the price process of any domestically traded asset 
in the model, with price dynamics under P of the form 
dII(t) = II(t)an(t) dt + lI(t)an (t) dW (t), 
then, for all t and P-a.s., we have 
~ ( t )  
- rd = uII(t)Ad(t)- 

DOMESTIC AND FOREIGN MARKET PRICES OF RISK 
249 
Applying this to (17.21)-(17.23) we get the following set of equations: 
In passing we note that, since the coefficient matrix 
is invertible by Assumption 17.2.1, Ad is uniquely determined (and in fact 
constant). This uniqueness is of course equivalent to the completeness of the 
model. 
We now go on to take the perspective of a foreign investor, and the first thing 
to notice is that the model (17.11)-(17.15) of the international market does not 
treat the foreign and the domestic points of view symmetrically. This is due to 
the fact that the exchange rate X by definition is quoted as 
units of the domestic currency 
unit of the foreign currency 
' 
From the foreign point of view the exchange rate X should thus be replaced by 
the exchange rate 
1 
Y (t) = - 
X(t> 
which is then quoted as 
unit of the foreign currency 
units of the domestic currency' 
and the dynamics for X, Sd, Sf, Bd, Bf should be replaced by the dynamics for 
Y, Sd, Sf, Bd, Bf. In order to do this we only have to compute the dynamics of 
Y, given those of X ,  and an easy application of It6's formula gives us 
dY = Yay dt + Yay d
~
,
 
(17.35) 
where 

