# Continuous Random Variables & Stochastic Processes

!!! info "Source"
    **The Basics of Financial Mathematics** by Richard F. Bass, University of Connecticut, Spring 2003.
    These notes are used for educational purposes.

## 9. Continuous Random Variables

9. Continuous random variables.
We are now going to start working toward continuous times and stocks that can
take any positive number as a value, so we need to prepare by extending some of our
definitions.
Given any random variable X ≥0, we can approximate it by r.v’s Xn that are
discrete. We let
Xn =
n2n
X
i=0
i
2n 1(i/2n≤X<(i+1)/2n).
In words, if X(ω) lies between 0 and n, we let Xn(ω) be the closest value i/2n that is
less than or equal to X(ω). For ω where X(ω) > n + 2−n we set Xn(ω) = 0. Clearly
the Xn are discrete, and approximate X. In fact, on the set where X ≤n, we have that
|X(ω) −Xn(ω)| ≤2−n.
For reasonable X we are going to define E X = lim E Xn. Since the Xn increase
with n, the limit must exist, although it could be +∞. If X is not necessarily nonnegative,
we define E X = E X+ −E X−, provided at least one of E X+ and E X−is finite. Here
X+ = max(X, 0) and X−= max(−X, 0).
There are some things one wants to prove, but all this has been worked out in
measure theory and the theory of the Lebesgue integral; see Note 1. Let us confine ourselves
here to showing this definition is the same as the usual one when X has a density.
Recall X has a density fX if
P(X ∈[a, b]) =
Z b
a
fX(x)dx
for all a and b. In this case
E X =
Z ∞
−∞
xfX(x)dx
provided
R ∞
−∞|x|fX(x)dx < ∞. With our definition of Xn we have
P(Xn = i/2n) = P(X ∈[i/2n, (i + 1)/2n)) =
Z (i+1)/2n
i/2n
fX(x)dx.
Then
E Xn =
X
i
i
2n P(Xn = i/2n) =
X
i
Z (i+1)/2n
i/2n
i
2n fX(x)dx.
Since x differs from i/2n by at most 1/2n when x ∈[i/2n, (i + 1)/2n), this will tend to
R
xfX(x)dx, unless the contribution to the integral for |x| ≥n does not go to 0 as n →∞.
As long as
R
|x|fX(x)dx < ∞, one can show that this contribution does indeed go to 0.
We also need an extension of the definition of conditional probability. A r.v. is G
measurable if (X > a) ∈G for every a. How do we define E [Z | G] when G is not generated
by a countable collection of disjoint sets?
Again, there is a completely worked out theory that holds in all cases; see Note 2.
Let us give a definition that is equivalent that works except for a very few cases. Let us
suppose that for each n the σ-field Gn is finitely generated. This means that Gn is generated
by finitely many disjoint sets Bn1, . . . , Bnmn. So for each n, the number of Bni is finite but
arbitrary, the Bni are disjoint, and their union is Ω. Suppose also that G1 ⊂G2 ⊂· · ·. Now
∪nGn will not in general be a σ-field, but suppose G is the smallest σ-field that contains
all the Gn. Finally, define P(A | G) = lim P(A | Gn).
This is a fairly general set-up. For example, let Ωbe the real line and let Gn be
generated by the sets (−∞, n), [n, ∞) and [i/2n, (i + 1)/2n). Then G will contain every
interval that is closed on the left and open on the right, hence G must be the σ-field that
one works with when one talks about Lebesgue measure on the line.
The question that one might ask is: how does one know the limit exists? Since
the Gn increase, we know by Proposition 4.3 that Mn = P(A | Gn) is a martingale with
respect to the Gn. It is certainly bounded above by 1 and bounded below by 0, so by the
martingale convergence theorem, it must have a limit as n →∞.
Once one has a definition of conditional probability, one defines conditional expec-
tation by what one expects. If X is discrete, one can write X as P
j aj1Aj and then one
defines
E [X | G] =
X
j
ajP(Aj | G).
If the X is not discrete, one write X = X+−X−, one approximates X+ by discrete random
variables, and takes a limit, and similarly for X−. One has to worry about convergence,
but everything does go through.
With this extended definition of conditional expectation, do all the properties of
Section 2 hold? The answer is yes. See Note 2 again.
With continuous random variables, we need to be more cautious about what we
mean when we say two random variables are equal. We say X = Y almost surely, abbre-
viated “a.s.”, if
P({ω : X(ω) ̸= Y (ω)}) = 0.
So X = Y except for a set of probability 0. The a.s. terminology is used other places as
well: Xn →Y a.s. means that except for a set of ω’s of probability zero, Xn(ω) →Y (ω).
Note 1. The best way to define expected value is via the theory of the Lebesgue integral. A
probability P is a measure that has total mass 1. So we define
E X =
Z
X(ω) P(dω).
To recall how the definition goes, we say X is simple if X(ω) = Pm
i=1 ai1Ai(ω) with each
ai ≥0, and for a simple X we define
E X =
m
X
i=1
aiP(Ai).
If X is nonnegative, we define
E X = sup{E Y : Y simple , Y ≤X}.
Finally, provided at least one of E X+ and E X−is finite, we define
E X = E X+ −E X−.
This is the same definition as described above.
Note 2.
The Radon-Nikodym theorem from measure theory says that if Q and P are two
finite measures on (Ω, G) and Q(A) = 0 whenever P(A) = 0 and A ∈G, then there exists an
integrable function Y that is G-measurable such that Q(A) =
R
A Y dP for every measurable
set A.
Let us apply the Radon-Nikodym theorem to the following situation. Suppose (Ω, F, P)
is a probability space and X ≥0 is integrable: E X < ∞. Suppose G ⊂F. Define two new
probabilities on G as follows. Let P′ = P|G, that is, P′(A) = P(A) if A ∈G and P′(A) is not
defined if A ∈F −G. Define Q by Q(A) =
R
A XdP = E [X; A] if A ∈G. One can show
(using the monotone convergence theorem from measure theory) that Q is a finite measure on
G. (One can also use this definition to define Q(A) for A ∈F, but we only want to define Q
on G, as we will see in a moment.) So Q and P′ are two finite measures on (Ω, G). If A ∈G
and P′(A) = 0, then P(A) = 0 and so it follows that Q(A) = 0. By the Radon-Nikodym
theorem there exists an integrable random variable Y such that Y is G measurable (this is why
we worried about which σ-field we were working with) and
Q(A) =
Z
A
Y dP′
if A ∈G. Note
((a) Y is G measurable, and
(b) if A ∈G,
E [Y ; A] = E [X; A]
because
E [Y ; A] = E [Y 1A] =
Z
A
Y dP =
Z
A
Y dP′ = Q(A) =
Z
A
XdP = E [X1A] = E [X; A].
We define E [X | G] to be the random variable Y . If X is integrable but not necessarily
nonnegative, then X+ and X−will be integrable and we define
E [X | G] = E [X+ | G] −E [X−| G].
We define
P(B | G) = E [1B | G]
if B ∈F.
Let us show that there is only one r.v., up to almost sure equivalence, that satisfies (a)
and (b) above. If Y and Z are G measurable, and E [Y ; A] = E [X; A] = E [Z; A] for A ∈G,
then the set An = (Y > Z + 1
n) will be in G, and so
E [Z; An] + 1
nP(An) = E [Z + 1
n; An] ≤E [Y ; An] = E [Z; An].
Consequently P(An) = 0. This is true for each positive integer n, so P(Y > Z) = 0. By
symmetry, P(Z > Y ) = 0, and therefore P(Y ̸= Z) = 0 as we wished.
If one checks the proofs of Propositions 2.3, 2.4, and 2.5, one sees that only properties
(a) and (b) above were used. So the propositions hold for the new definition of conditional
expectation as well.
In the case where G is finitely or countably generated, under both the new and old
definitions (a) and (b) hold. By the uniqueness result, the new and old definitions agree.


## 10. Stochastic Processes

10. Stochastic processes.
We will be talking about stochastic processes. Previously we discussed sequences
S1, S2, . . . of r.v.’s. Now we want to talk about processes Yt for t ≥0. For example, we
can think of St being the price of a stock at time t. Any nonnegative time t is allowed.
We typically let Ft be the smallest σ-field with respect to which Ys is measurable
for all s ≤t. So Ft = σ(Ys : s ≤t). As you might imagine, there are a few technicalities
one has to worry about. We will try to avoid thinking about them as much as possible,
but see Note 1.
We call a collection of σ-fields Ft with Fs ⊂Ft if s < t a filtration. We say the
filtration satisfies the “usual conditions” if the Ft are right continuous and complete (see
Note 1); all the filtrations we consider will satisfy the usual conditions.
We say a stochastic process has continuous paths if the following holds. For each
ω, the map t →Yt(ω) defines a function from [0, ∞) to R. If this function is a continuous
function for all ω’s except for a set of probability zero, we say Yt has continuous paths.
Definition 10.1. A mapping τ : Ω→[0, ∞) is a stopping time if for each t we have
(τ ≤t) ∈Ft.
Typically, τ will be a continuous random variable and P(τ = t) = 0 for each t, which
is why we need a definition just a bit different from the discrete case.
Since (τ < t) = ∪∞
n=1(τ ≤t −1
n) and (τ ≤t −1
n) ∈Ft−1
n ⊂Ft, then for a stopping
time τ we have (τ < t) ∈Ft for all t.
Conversely, suppose τ is a nonnegative r.v. for which (τ < t) ∈Ft for all t. We
claim τ is a stopping time. The proof is easy, but we need the right continuity of the Ft
here, so we put the proof in Note 2.
A continuous time martingale (or submartingale) is what one expects: each Mt is
integrable, each Mt is Ft measurable, and if s < t, then
E [Mt | Fs] = Ms.
(Here we are saying the left hand side and the right hand side are equal almost surely; we
will usually not write the “a.s.” since almost all of our equalities for random variables are
only almost surely.)
The analogues of Doob’s theorems go through. Note 3 has the proofs.
Note 1.
For technical reasons, one typically defines Ft as follows. Let F0
t = σ(Ys : s ≤t).
This is what we referred to as Ft above. Next add to F0
t all sets N for which P(N) = 0. Such
sets are called null sets, and since they have probability 0, they don’t affect anything. In fact,
one wants to add all sets N that we think of being null sets, even though they might not be
measurable. To be more precise, we say N is a null set if inf{P(A) : A ∈F, N ⊂A} = 0.
Recall we are starting with a σ-field F and all the F0
t ’s are contained in F. Let F00
t
be the σ-
field generated by F0
t and all null sets N, that is, the smallest σ-field containing F0
t and every
null set. In measure theory terminology, what we have done is to say F00
t
is the completion of
F0
t .
Lastly, we want to make our σ-fields right continuous. We set Ft = ∩ε>0F00
t+ε. Al-
though the union of σ-fields is not necessarily a σ-field, the intersection of σ-fields is. Ft
contains F00
t
but might possibly contain more besides. An example of an event that is in Ft
but that may not be in F00
t
is
A = {ω : lim
n→∞Yt+ 1
n (ω) ≥0}.
A ∈F00
t+ 1
m for each m, so it is in Ft. There is no reason it needs to be in F00
t
if Y is not
necessarily continuous at t. It is easy to see that ∩ε>0Ft+ε = Ft, which is what we mean
when we say Ft is right continuous.
When talking about a stochastic process Yt, there are various types of measurability
one can consider. Saying Yt is adapted to Ft means Yt is Ft measurable for each t. However,
since Yt is really a function of two variables, t and ω, there are other notions of measurability
that come into play. We will be considering stochastic processes that have continuous paths or
that are predictable (the definition will be given later), so these various types of measurability
will not be an issue for us.
Note 2. Suppose (τ < t) ∈Ft for all t. Then for each positive integer n0,
(τ ≤t) = ∩∞
n=n0(τ < t + 1
n).
For n ≥n0 we have (τ < t + 1
n) ∈Ft+ 1
n ⊂Ft+ 1
n0 . Therefore (τ ≤t) ∈Ft+ 1
n0 for each n0.
Hence the set is in the intersection: ∩n0>1Ft+ 1
n0 ⊂∩ε>0Ft+ε = Ft.
Note 3.
We want to prove the analogues of Theorems 5.3 and 5.4. The proof of Doob’s
inequalities are simpler. We only will need the analogue of Theorem 5.4(b).
Theorem 10.2. Suppose Mt is a martingale with continuous paths and E M 2
t < ∞for
all t. Then for each t0
E [(sup
s≤t0
Ms)2] ≤4E [|Mt0|2].
Proof. By the definition of martingale in continuous time, Nk is a martingale in discrete time
with respect to Gk when we set Nk = Mkt0/2n and Gk = Fkt0/2n. By Theorem 5.4(b)
E [ max
0≤k≤2n M 2
kt0/2n] = E [ max
0≤k≤2n N 2
k] ≤4E N 2
2n = 4E M 2
t0.
(Recall (maxk ak)2 = max a2
k if all the ak ≥0.)
Now let n →∞. Since Mt has continuous paths, max0≤k≤2n M 2
kt0/2n increases up to
sups≤t0 M 2
s . Our result follows from the monotone convergence theorem from measure theory
(see Note 4).
We now prove the analogue of Theorem 5.3. The proof is simpler if we assume that
E M 2
t is finite; the result is still true without this assumption.
Theorem 10.3. Suppose Mt is a martingale with continuous paths, E M 2
t < ∞for all t,
and τ is a stopping time bounded almost surely by t0. Then E Mτ = E Mt0.
Proof.
We approximate τ by stopping times taking only finitely many values. For n > 0
define
τn(ω) = inf{kt0/2n : τ(ω) < kt0/2n}.
τn takes only the values kt0/2n for some k ≤2n.
The event (τn ≤jt0/2n) is equal to
(τ < jt0/2n), which is in Fjt0/2n since τ is a stopping time. So (τn ≤s) ∈Fs if s is of the
form jt0/2n for some j. A moment’s thought, using the fact that τn only takes values of the
form kt0/2n, shows that τn is a stopping time.
It is clear that τn ↓τ for every ω. Since Mt has continuous paths, Mτn →Mτ a.s.
Let Nk and Gk be as in the proof of Theorem 10.2. Let σn = k if τn = kt0/2n. By
Theorem 5.3,
E Nσn = E N2n,
which is the same as saying
E Mτn = E Mt0.
To complete the proof, we need to show E Mτn converges to E Mτ. This is almost
obvious, because we already observed that Mτn →Mτ a.s. Without the assumption that
E M 2
t < ∞for all t, this is actually quite a bit of work, but with the assumption it is not too
bad.
Either |Mτn −Mτ| is less than or equal to 1 or greater than 1. If it is greater than 1,
it is less than |Mτn −Mτ|2. So in either case,
|Mτn −Mτ| ≤1 + |Mτn −Mτ|2.
(10.1)
Because both |Mτn| and |Mτ| are bounded by sups≤t0 |Ms|, the right hand side of (10.1) is
bounded by 1 + 4 sups≤t0 |Ms|2, which is integrable by Theorem 10.2. |Mτn −Mτ| →0, and
so by the dominated convergence theorem from measure theory (Note 4),
E |Mτn −Mτ| →0.
Finally,
|E Mτn −E Mτ| = |E (Mτn −Mτ)| ≤E |Mτn −Mτ| →0.
Note 4.
The dominated convergence theorem says that if Xn →X a.s. and |Xn| ≤Y a.s.
for each n, where E Y < ∞, then E Xn →E X.
The monotone convergence theorem says that if Xn ≥0 for each n, Xn ≤Xn+1 for
each n, and Xn →X, then E Xn →E X.


## 11. Brownian Motion

11. Brownian motion.
First, let us review a few facts about normal random variables. We say X is a
normal random variable with mean a and variance b2 if
P(c ≤X ≤d) =
Z d
c
√
2πb2 e−(y−a)2/2b2dy
and we will abbreviate this by saying X is N(a, b2). If X is N(a, b2), then E X = a,
Var X = b2, and E |X|p < ∞is finite for every positive integer p. Moreover
E etX = eatet2b2/2.
Let Sn be a simple symmetric random walk. This means that Yk = Sk −Sk−1
equals +1 with probability 1
2, equals −1 with probability 1
2, and is independent of Yj for
j < k. We notice that E Sn = 0 while E S2
n = Pn
i=1 E Y 2
i + P
i̸=j E YiYj = n using the fact
that E [YiYj] = (E Yi)(E Yj) = 0.
Define Xn
t = Snt/√n if nt is an integer and by linear interpolation for other t. If
nt is an integer, E Xn
t = 0 and E (Xn
t )2 = t. It turns out Xn
t does not converge for any ω.
However there is another kind of convergence, called weak convergence, that takes
place. There exists a process Zt such that for each k, each t1 < t2 < · · · < tk, and each
a1 < b1, a2 < b2, . . . , ak < bk, we have
(1) The paths of Zt are continuous as a function of t.
(2) P(Xn
t1 ∈[a1, b1], . . . , Xn
tk ∈[ak, bk]) →P(Zt1 ∈[a1, b1], . . . , Ztk ∈[ak, bk]).
See Note 1 for more discussion of weak convergence.
The limit Zt is called a Brownian motion starting at 0. It has the following prop-
erties.
(1) E Zt = 0.
(2) E Z2
t = t.
(3) Zt −Zs is independent of Fs = σ(Zr, r ≤s).
(4) Zt −Zs has the distribution of a normal random variable with mean 0 and variance
t −s. This means
P(Zt −Zs ∈[a, b]) =
Z b
a
p
2π(t −s)
e−y2/2(t−s)dy.
(This result follows from the central limit theorem.)
(5) The map t →Zt(ω) is continuous for almost all ω.
See Note 2 for a few remarks on this definition.
It is common to use Bt (“B” for Brownian) or Wt (“W” for Wiener, who was the
first person to prove rigorously that Brownian motion exists). We will most often use Wt.
We will use Brownian motion extensively and develop some of its properties. As
one might imagine for a limit of a simple random walk, the paths of Brownian motion have
a huge number of oscillations. It turns out that the function t →Wt(ω) is continuous, but
it is not differentiable; in fact one cannot define a derivative at any value of t. Another
bizarre property: if one looks at the set of times at which Wt(ω) is equal to 0, this is a
set which is uncountable, but contains no intervals. There is nothing special about 0 – the
same is true for the set of times at which Wt(ω) is equal to a for any level a.
In what follows, one of the crucial properties of a Brownian motion is that it is a
martingale with continuous paths. Let us prove this.
Proposition 11.1. Wt is a martingale with respect to Ft and Wt has continuous paths.
Proof. As part of the definition of a Brownian motion, Wt has continuous paths. Wt is Ft
measurable by the definition of Ft. Since the distribution of Wt is that of a normal random
variable with mean 0 and variance t, then E |Wt| < ∞for all t. (In fact, E |Wt|n < ∞for
all n.)
The key property is to show E [Wt | Fs] = Ws.
E [Wt | Fs] = E [Wt −Ws | Fs] + E [Ws | Fs] = E [Wt −Ws] + Ws = Ws.
We used here the facts that Wt −Ws is independent of Fs and that E [Wt −Ws] = 0
because Wt and Ws have mean 0.
We will also need
Proposition 11.2. W 2
t −t is a martingale with continuous paths with respect to Ft.
Proof.
That W 2
t −t is integrable and is Ft measurable is as in the above proof. We
calculate
E [W 2
t −t | Fs] = E [((Wt −Ws) + Ws)2 | Fs] −t
= E [(Wt −Ws)2 | Fs] + 2E [(Wt −Ws)Ws | Fs] + E [W 2
s | Fs] −t
= E [(Wt −Ws)2] + 2WsE [Wt −Ws | Fs] + W 2
s −t.
We used the facts that Ws is Fs measurable and that (Wt −Ws)2 is independent of Fs
because Wt −Ws is. The second term on the last line is equal to WsE [Wt −Ws] = 0. The
first term, because Wt −Ws is normal with mean 0 and variance t −s, is equal to t −s.
Substituting, the last line is equal to
(t −s) + 0 + W 2
s −t = W 2
s −s
as required.
Note 1.
A sequence of random variables Xn converges weakly to X if P(a < Xn < b) →
P(a < X < b) for all a, b ∈[−∞, ∞] such that P(X = a) = P(X = b) = 0. a and b can be
infinite. If Xn converges to a normal random variable, then P(X = a) = P(X = b) = 0 for all
a and b. This is the type of convergence that takes place in the central limit theorem. It will
not be true in general that Xn converges to X almost surely.
For a sequence of random vectors (Xn
1 , . . . , Xm
k ) to converge to a random vector
(X1, . . . , Xk), one can give an analogous definition. But saying that the normalized random
walks Xn(t) above converge weakly to Zt actually says more than (2). A result from probability
theory says that Xn converges to X weakly if and only if E [f(Xn)] →E [f(X)] whenever f
is a bounded continuous function on R. We use this to define weak convergence for stochastic
processes. Let C([0, ∞) be the collection of all continuous functions from [0, ∞) to the reals.
This is a metric space, so the notion of function from C([0, ∞)) to R being continuous makes
sense. We say that the processes Xn converge weakly to the process Z, and mean by this
that E [F(Xn)] →E [F(Z)] whenever F is a bounded continuous function on C([0, ∞)). One
example of such a function F would be F(f) = sup0≤t<∞|f(t)| if f ∈C([0, ∞)); Another
would be F(f) =
R 1
0 f(t)dt.
The reason one wants to show that Xn converges weakly to Z instead of just showing
(2) is that weak convergence can be shown to imply that Z has continuous paths.
Note 2.
First of all, there is some redundancy in the definition: one can show that parts
of the definition are implied by the remaining parts, but we won’t worry about this. Second,
we actually want to let Ft to be the completion of σ(Zs : s ≤t), that is, we throw in all the
null sets into each Ft. One can prove that the resulting Ft are right continuous, and hence
the filtration Ft satisfies the “usual” conditions. Finally, the “almost all” in (5) means that
t →Zt(ω) is continuous for all ω, except for a set of ω of probability zero.

